This video, I'm going to share with you my new updated list of the supplements that I'm taking, and I'll also cover other questions related to diet, supplements, exercise, and blood work. The first question, where is your new updated supplement list that you said you're gonna share with us? Yes. I've been talking about my new updated supplement list for a while and I actually published it last week so you can get it, the full list of all the supplements and in the right dose at simlun.co/supplement-list. But I'm gonna break down some of the key supplements that I'm taking myself right now and my goal is primarily longevity and anti aging. I don't take supplements for any other reason. Like, I don't take supplements for weight loss or muscle, growth, on a regular basis or cognition or nootropics, anything like that. But these are the supplements I'm taking on a daily basis. So glycine ten grams a day most importantly for collagen synthesis, but glycine is also important for glutathione, creatine, and heme synthesis. So just a very, you know, universal supplement almost that I think is safe, well tolerated, and a lot of benefits. I don't take ten grams of the powder glycine entirely. I'm getting also some glycine from, for example, gelatin powder that I can add to my yogurt or I can just make gelatin desserts out of it. So just use the gelatin powder, make jello, and add like some berries or something like that. It tastes pretty good, very low calorie, and pretty high in glycine. Next collagen peptides. So I take this because there's, you know, several human clinical trials that show it helps with skin rejuvenation or reduces wrinkles and helps with skin elasticity. So collagen goes down in your skin starting in your twenties already, and you don't wanna, like, play catch up. And collagen peptides in human clinical trials have also been shown to help with cardiometabolic risk factors. So, it goes beyond just the skin side. Next, omega three is two to three grams a day. I'm taking the dose of two to three grams because I'm trying to increase my omega three index, which is, you know, an objective biomarker that you can track, and a higher omega three index over 8%, which looks at the amount of EPA and DHA in your red blood cells, that is associated with reduced neurodegeneration, reduced heart disease, and reduced all cause mortality. So I'm trying to get my omega three index above 8%. So my current score is 9%, which is already in the lowest risk category, but I'm trying to get my index to 10 11% as of right now. It's hard to do it with just food, or it's much faster to do it with some supplements, omega three supplements, but you can also do it with food if you just eat, you know, only fish pretty much every day. So I'm not eating fish every day. I'm eating it quite often, but not every day. So I'm just supplementing with the two to three grams of omega threes. And the other thing with this omega three index is that it changes. So the turnover of red blood cells is six months, so it takes six months to change or see a change in your results. So the last time I did it was a few months ago, Got a score of 9%. I'm gonna do it again in two months and expecting to get like at least 10% maybe even 11% which is my goal right now. So I'm like adjusting my dose based on, my omega three index. So I'm not taking more than that, and I'm going to maybe reduce the intake once I reach the proper, index that I want. Next, hyaluronic acid, two hundred milligrams a day. And this also has been shown to help with skin hydration and skin elasticity in human trials. Azaxanthin, six to twelve milligrams a day, recently added it to my stack because it also has clinical trials showing it helps with skin antiaging and, there's also clinical trials that it helps with blood pressure, inflammation, lipids. So they one of the unique effects of astaxanthin is that, it protects against UV radiation. So it's the summertime right now or we are heading into the summertime and, you know, there's a lot more sunlight here in Estonia as well. So I'm just taking it as skin protector against the excess UV radiation. And lastly, TMG, one thousand milligrams a day. This I'm taking to lower my homocysteine which was slightly elevated so I'm trying to get that below as well. And this one thousand milligram dose, it might not be enough. We'll see, but I could even have to increase it up to two to three grams, per day. But TMG has many other benefits as well, so it supports methylation, obviously, but also helps with exercise performance. And these are the six supplements I'm taking right now. I've obviously taken a lot more in the past and so this is the current supplement stack as of now. I also have some supplements that I'm taking on and off, so a few times a month or a quarter or a few times a year. So I'm not taking these daily and these aren't like in my regular routine. So Berberine, one gram a day helps with lipids, blood sugar inflammation, as well as waist circumference. So if I'm trying to lose some weight or if I'm trying to get my blood sugar very low or lower then, I'm taking some berberine and like a larger dose of one gram I've found to be more effective than just four hundred milligrams, which is the regular dose. Creatine, three grams a day. So the reason I don't take creatine all the time is because it has been found to reduce VO2 max, probably because of increasing water weight or just increasing muscle mass, for example. So if you just have too much mass then your VO two max would slightly be lower. So I'm not trying to maximize muscle strength and muscle growth right now. I'm mostly focusing right now on VO2 max. So I'm trying to get that even higher as well. So I'm not taking creatine for that reason right now. Boron, three grams a day that's gonna be for reducing sex hormone binding globulin which then increases free testosterone. Also good for bone mineralization, but my testosterone is fine right now so I don't need to take it in this moment. HMB calcium, three grams a day. So this I usually take in a faster state if I'm trying to preserve as much muscle tissue and muscle strength, in so doing. And, the human studies on HMB have found that it generally works if you're like an elderly person or if you're suffering from sarcopenia because it reduces then the muscle catabolism, but it doesn't work in other cases. So I take it in a fasted state in the morning if I am trying to preserve muscle, but, that's not my goal right now or at least I'm getting enough protein and calories as of now that my muscle mass isn't in danger of being catabolized. So I don't have anything to gain from HMB right now, but if I were in a severe calorie deficit or if I were to do more fasting or if I were to try to maximize muscle strength then I would take this one. Vitamin d three and k two, so these will I would take in the winter months when I'm not getting exposed to that much sunlight, so I'm trying to maintain good vitamin d levels. And for that, I'll just take a d three supplement. Nacinamide is a form of b three, vitamin b three and it's one of the cheapest and a pretty effective NAD booster as well. Seed probiotic, so this is, I think the best probiotic out there and this is the only probiotic I actually take. Kind of take it all the time, you know, a few times a year. I'll just do a short course and I do notice that this one works whereas the most other probiotics I I notice no effects. NMN and NR, so again I might do them a few times a year, not on a regular basis because I don't feel like I need to do them. And, usually the biggest reason I would want to take NMN or NR is when I'm like exposed to some sort of sort of like circadian mismatch or jet lag. So it helps with circadian rhythm alignment in my opinion and helps with like steep deprivation. Aged garlic extract, two thousand four hundred milligrams a day. This one is beneficial for lipids, blood pressure, inflammation, blood sugar. So garlic is I think one of the most potent quote unquote superfoods out there. But, yeah, like the aged garlic extract has human clinical trials as well showing benefits on lipids and other cardiometabolic risk factors, so for heart health. But again I'm not taking it every day. Melatonin, zero point three milligrams a day. So like a microdose melatonin every once in a while to, yeah, usually for the antioxidant benefits, I don't need it for the sleep benefits. I might take like a larger dose if I'm traveling or if I'm changing time zones to realign the circadian rhythms. But, for me a smaller dose usually works better than a larger dose. Like, I just sleep better with a zero point three milligram dose. And one supplement that's missing from here is magnesium, so I'll take it as well for just making sure that they have optimal magnesium status. And maybe sometimes it's useful for sleep or stress or relaxation or something like that, but it's not, you know, like a daily supplement stack. So this is the list that I'm taking right now. In the PDF that you can get for free from the link below, you will also find, like, the supplements that are evidence based, that I do think that work. There is evidence that they work, but I'm not taking them right now for for for reasons. And there's a list of supplements that don't work either, so like the supplements that I recommend against, so check it out from the link in the description. Interestingly, peptides could be the future of longevity supplements. One of the most evidence based peptides for skin aging is copper peptide GHK. Copper is needed for collagen and elastin synthesis as well as collagen uptake into cells. Copper peptide GHK has been found to modulate skin regeneration and wound healing. In diabetic humans, GHK has been seen to speed up skin healing from ulcers by three folds. GHK copper peptide also modulates antioxidant genes that protect against inflammation, UVB radiation, and oxidative stress. So copper peptide GHK helps with collagen synthesis. It helps with skin regeneration, wound healing, and skin elasticity. I've been using the Alatura Gold Serum for over a year. The gold serum has GHK copper tripeptide that helps with skin regeneration, pigmentation, and elasticity. There's also other amazing natural food grade ingredients like marine collagen, organic olive oil, plant retinol, aaxanthin, bee propolis, beeswax, coq10 essential oils, and hemp seed oil, all of which support collagen synthesis and skin health. All Alitura skin care products are made of natural ingredients with no microplastics or hormone disruptors, unlike conventional brands. Their products are also bottled in myron glass, free from xenoestrogens and plastics. This makes the gold serum the most unique and powerful skin serum you can use, and I'm personally taking it daily. There are hundreds of positive testimonials and reviews you can check out on the Alitura website for some amazing skin transformations. Use code seam for a 20% discount at alitura.com. Next question. What are the thoughts about studies on omega three supplements showing increased risk of arterial fibrillation and how real is that risk? So this is one of the biggest negative talking points against omega threes online so it can, you know, even besides the lipid peroxidation and inflammation part, which again is still very it's still there's limited evidence to suggest that that the omega three supplements would increase inflammation. If anything, then it's actually the opposite. But most most of the studies find that the omega threes reduce inflammation, but the second biggest talking point is gonna be the atrial fibrillation, so arrhythmias and other cardiovascular complications. So there is some randomized controlled trials finding that but usually it's not it's not consistent, it's not across the board. There are some studies that do find an effect, others don't, but the studies that do find effect usually are done with very large doses of omega-3s. So four grams of omega-3s a day and they're also, you know, for usually the four grams of omega threes are prescribed for people who have heart disease and they're at a high risk group. So these people are already at an increased risk of atrial fibrillation and arrhythmias and other cardiovascular complications. So I don't think it's like a very fair comparison in that sense because those people already are at a high risk and they're all all also taking, like, a very high dose. So the high dose is what appears to be associated with the risk, whereas a low dose below two grams and below four grams generally isn't associated with that risk. So I don't think there's, for most people, anything to worry about unless they are taking a megadose of omega threes, which I think, you know, isn't a smart idea. But and and if they don't have, like, already pre existing atrial fibrillation or a history of that or history of arrhythmias or other cardiovascular complications. So if you're clear from that then taking like a more moderate dose is a fine and there's no evidence that it's going to increase the risk of this atrial fibrillation in otherwise healthy people as long as they're taking like you know normal dose. If you're taking like four grams for no reason then you know it might increase the risk over time over the course of years. But, again, in smaller doses there's there's no evidence that it would do so. And again, like like I said earlier, my current omega three dose is two to three grams, and the reason I'm doing that is because I'm trying to aim for the omega three index of 10 to 11%. And that's a objective biomarker that is associated with better health outcomes. Like, there's studies finding that the higher omega three index is linked to lower heart disease and lower neurodegeneration. So you need to also look at the totality of evidence, you know, not just one study for example. So I'm taking the two to three gram dose to increase my omega three index right now and then I'll perhaps like reduce it to slightly lower. But again, I'm just in the short term trying to increase the index to get into that 10 to 11%. Next question, can astaxanthin inhibit DHT and go's gynecomastia if you take twenty two milligrams a day? So that's an interesting and specific question. There is, there is studies finding asteaxanthin inhibits DHT and it can increase testosterone levels as well. There's no studies about azeaxanthin affecting gynecomastia or reducing gynecomastia. You know, one theoretical or mechanistic effect could be that azeaxanthin can increase gynecomastia because if you have higher testosterone then that extra testosterone or elevated testosterone can be converted into estrogen. So that's why in puberty, some people, some guys get gynecomastia because of puberty. So in puberty you have, you know, massive amounts of testosterone or like a very large increase so that gets converted to estrogen and, but I think I don't think the azeaxanthin will raise your testosterone that high that it gets converted to estrogen. It's the effect size probably isn't that that significant. So I don't think there's anything to worry that azeaxanthin would increase gynecomastia, but there's no evidence that it would reduce it either, if that makes sense. It does inhibit DHT slightly, which might some people might find useful for hair loss or something like that, but it also does increase testosterone although not in significant amounts that would be like increasing your risk of gynecomastia. Does that make sense? And twenty two milligrams a day, that's a pretty large dose. I don't know what's the reason for this specific dose, but for example in the other clinical trials where asexanthin is used for, you know, the cardiac metabolic health as well as skin aging then the dosage is usually six to twelve milligrams. Even three milligrams is found to be effective. So twenty two milligrams is definitely like overkill for at least the skin and aging and and like the lipid effects. Next question, I have a BMI under eighteen. Is it a problem for longevity? So that's an interesting question like, is having a BMI below eighteen which is considered underweight and like almost like in the malnourished category usually associated with that. Is this gonna be bad for longevity? Well in the epidemiological studies they find the u shaped association with BMI and mortality risk. So if your BMI is below twenty two and above twenty five then that's associated with increased risk and the lowest mortality can be somewhere between 25 to 22, of BMI units. But the thing is that a low BMI usually is explained by this reverse causation effect. So people who have a very low BMI, so below 22, they, might suffer from some medical condition or some other thing that increases that risk. So they might be malnourished, they might be anorexic, they might have sarcopenia, they might have some medical condition like cancer or heart disease or something else that just makes them go super low body weight or they might have some drug abuse disorder, mental conditions and alcohol disorders or something like that. Those can explain the reason why a low BMI is usually associated with increased mortality. But the studies that do control for that the studies that control for this reverse causation effect, they find that the lowest risk of mortality is still with a slightly lower BMI. So a BMI between 18 to 22 is found to be still a very low risk of mortality and the increased the BMI below 18 is still associated with a slightly increased risk even if you take into consideration the reverse causation potential and the effect of that. So that could be just because if you are still very low body weight like a BMI below eighteen then it could just mean that you're very frail or very low body weight or just malnourished. So you need to make sure that you get enough of the micronutrients, micronutrients, and you need to make sure that you have enough bone density and, enough muscle tissue as well. So for that, you can look at your like DEXA scan. You do a DEXA scan. You can get, your bone density measured. If your bone density is, you know, below standard deviations, so something like 0.5 standard deviations below normal for your age group or even more, then that would be a red flag. Because if your bone density is low and your body weight is also low, then, you're just at a high risk of frailty and sarcopenia. And the same with muscle mass, if your muscle mass is very low for your age group and your height then, that will be also like something to be concerned with because muscle tissue low muscle mass is associated with increased mortality as well, especially the older you get. Maybe not in your twenties, it's not gonna be that big of a concern, but in your forties already, it would start to increase the risk at least based on the studies. So if you're very low BMI, then just make sure you have high bone density, high muscle mass and you're getting enough micronutrients and micronutrients. And if you find that you have some red flags there then you just you would be better off by just increasing your BMI slightly to get into a slightly higher body weight which would then increase your bone density and increase your muscle mass as well. But the BMI again is not like a perfect unit at least in the middle of the BMI. So if your BMI is something like twenty six or something like that you're in the overweight category but because you have muscle you might be, fine. So sometimes having too much muscle can skew the results of the BMI but not in the extremes, if you get what I mean. If your BMI is thirty or 18 then you're in this like extreme kind of end of the spectrum that in that scenario is more accurate or is more relevant. So if your BMI is over 30 then chances are you just have too much body fat even if you think you have muscle tissue. So my BMI is twenty five point five. I have abs, you know, I'm very lean and I also have high bone density like two standard deviations above normal for my age. So that's you know pretty high bone density even for my age. So that's why my BMI is slightly elevated but my body fat percentage and my waist circumference is super low. So that that doesn't inherently increase my risk of mortality. So the BMI in that scenario is less accurate because of these confounding variables. But if my BMI were to be 30 and I would have like a gut or even if I have like muscle, I'm like a you know quote unquote fat power lifter then then it's it's gonna be worse. It's gonna be still indicative of a poorer prognosis in the future because of the extra body fat even if you think you have muscle, if that makes sense. And the same with the extremely low body weight. If your BMI is eighteen then chances are you are underweight and chances are you have lower bone density. Chances are you have lower muscle mass. So the more extreme the BMI is the more accurate or more relevant it tends to be in my opinion. There's no way someone who has a BMI forty five is like a lean bodybuilder or a lean powerlifter because to get a BMI forty five you need to be obese pretty much. And the same with a BMI fifteen. Like there's no way you have normal bone density and normal muscle mass with a BMI fifteen if that makes sense. So So you need to measure those things more importantly. And, you know, some of the I'll outline some of the other markers that in addition to BMI is more important. So like muscle mass, bone density, waist circumference, and the waist to hip ratio. If those are normal, then a BMI of 18 inherently isn't bad but you need to look at them and just relying on the BMI alone is not gonna be enough. But because you're on the extreme end of the spectrum then it's very likely that those other numbers are also off if that makes sense. Next question, when is your next book coming? So yes, my next book, The Longevity Deep, it's scheduled to be released in June and I've, you know, talked a lot about it over the last few months already. Every once in a while I've been writing it for eight months. It's just a heck of a lot a lot of work and I've been just trying to make it as perfect as as possible. I'm going through like proofreading several times, editing, making some adjustments, making sure it's all like custom graphs. It's a Yeah, like it's a very solid and polished book and it just takes a lot more time to do it that way and it's hopefully coming out or at least it's already proofread. It's getting through the final edits or final adjustments in terms of the formatting which is not going to take that much time but it's gonna be released in June. Next question. What is the optimal running lifting workout split for stamina focus? So for stamina focus, endurance, you know, cardio, respiratory fitness, doing cardio, for that focus you should still spend the majority of your training doing cardio. So the sport specificity obviously is important if you're training for some whatever kind of a sport event, cycling, swimming, running, you need to train that the most. The most of your time should be spent training for that whatever event it is. If you're training for general general stamina and general endurance, general quad respiratory fitness, then you should still you know spend a lot of time doing that particular form of cardio and doing endurance work. So combining that with weightlifting is obviously important and beneficial for longevity purposes and it can have, like, a complimentary effect on your endurance. So for example, if you have higher bone density from lifting weights then you might get less joint pain from running long hours and vice versa. If you're, for example, doing only weights then adding some cardio can improve your gym performance because you have better endurance and you can do more sets and more reps without getting gassed out. So you always wanna do both, but, you know, you can adjust your focus for that particular season or stage of your life. So right now my focus is slightly more on the cardio side and I'm trying to get my VO2 max as high as possible and, for that I'm still doing weight lifting. Obviously, I'm doing it like three times a week, but I'm incorporating a lot more cardio. So what would be the most optimal endurance protocol, so just solely trying to maximize stamina endurance, I think it would be like four times a week of zone two and for like at least an hour. So the more zone two you do the better it generally is for the accumulation of this slow twitch muscle fibers and building your this base for your cardiovascular fitness which lays the foundation to your endurance. So all the best endurance athletes in the world, they don't do a lot of intervals or didn't do a lot of weightlifting. They do a little bit of it. But, like, 80% of the time, they do zone two. Literally, like the Tour de France cyclists, they do 80% of their training and they train obviously like, you know, over ten hours probably like fourteen, fifteen hours per week, even more maybe. And most of their time is spent in zone two doing that kind of training because that's that's gonna lay the foundation to your endurance and stamina by increasing the slow twitch muscle fibers. And then I would add like a one once per week interval session, so this four by four Norwegian method or any other derivation of that, that will be enough for the high intensity interval training component and then like once a week for weightlifting. That will be also enough for solely endurance and stamina focus. So you can do, like, these compound lifts, barbell squats, deadlifts, bench press, pull ups. I think that's all you pretty much need to, get the benefits from, resistance training. The thing with the barbell squats is that if you're doing a lot of leg endurance, so if you're doing running and cycling then you're getting a lot of stimulation for your legs as well and just doing barbell squats might put too much like strain or you could just overreach with your legs by just doing too many barbell squats. So you need to like, okay if I'm already doing a lot of cycling and stuff like that I probably don't need to do additional barbell squats. So but you could still benefit from like deadlifts and bench press for example. So it depends on what type of endurance are you doing but you know the main focus should be still on that particular event that you're training for. So if you want to get good in endurance then you need to do more more endurance. Like, you need to run for, you know, hours and hours every week. Next question. What's the best way for a 54 year old man to lose 10 kilograms? Diet, supplements mainly. Thank you. So the principles of weight loss are pretty pretty much the same for all age groups. It's the same for 20 year olds and 80 year olds. Obviously, the approach of how you get there or what kind of, you know, routines you follow has to be adjusted for the age group and the individual. And I think there is, like, no single gold standard diet or exercise program out there. You need to always find what suits you the best, but I can obviously outline you some of the main principles that I think you need to kind of focus on. First of all, in terms of diet, you know, to lose weight you need to be eating slightly less calories and you achieve that by reducing your calorie intake or increasing energy expenditure, ideally both. Usually increasing exercise is gonna be more suitable for most people because it's easier to move more than to eat less in my opinion. But but there are literally like dozens of different diets that you can follow. You could do a carnivore diet, you could do a vegan diet, you can do it if it fits your macro diet, you can do a paleo diet. Whatever diet it is, the diet is something that you just need to adhere to over the long term because you can't outrun or out exercise a bad diet for too long. You need a diet that satiates you and enables you to be in a negative energy balance for the foreseeable future until you like reach your target goal and you know if you want to maintain the the new body weight then you also need to adhere to it for a little bit longer as well. So all the diets generally work through the same, not necessarily like a mechanism, but through the same effect which is increased satiety. So for example, a carnivore diet, there is, you know, thousands of success stories of people who lose weight with a carnivore diet and the reason for that is because it's high in protein and the high protein and the high meat intake satiate them and they end up eating fewer calories. The same with the vegan diet, there's also thousands of success stories of people losing weight on a vegan diet and the reason for that is because the vegan diet is usually higher in fiber and, that higher fiber intake satiates the people. And, there's, you know, so many studies showing that a higher fiber intake does support weight loss and increases satiety signaling. So the carnivore diet and the vegan diet are actually working through the same effect which is increased satiety. It's just that on a vegan diet it's the high fiber and on a carnivore diet it's the high protein that mediates the effect on the satiety and reduced hunger, reduced energy intake. And the same applies to like it fits your if it fits your macros. Like some people just want to have like whatever food they want as long as it fits into their daily calorie intake. And there's, you know, thousands of success stories as well with the eFit Fit Your Macros approach. So, you know, you can literally find any diet that works. You just need to find a diet that works for you over the long term and what helps you to reach satiety and what reach what helps you to reach a energy deficit. Some of the key principles on a diet perspective is that you wanna aim for a slightly higher protein intake because that helps with satiety and it also increases the thermic effect of food, which means you will be burning calories on digestion. So for protein you want to aim for like 0.8 grams per pound of body weight which is 1.6 grams per kilogram and for most people it's gonna be like a 100 to 150 grams of protein depending on their body weight. So the slightly higher protein intake is gonna be beneficial for fat loss and muscle maintenance and satiety and then at least in studies like fiber is usually actually like more associated with weight loss because fiber is also lower in calories and pretty filling. So combining the fiber plus protein is usually the most satiating combo in my opinion at least. So that's why like a lot of the low carb diets have a lot of success stories because they eat fiber and protein and that's why they lose weight quite easily in so doing as well. So what I like to do when I'm trying to lose weight would be eat eat more protein, eat more fiber and then I'll add like some whole food carbs, potatoes usually in there as well because like actually the potato is very satiating like just individual foods. If you look at individual foods then there are studies showing that the potato is the most satiating food just if you have to eat like one single food and there's some people doing like the potato diet where they lose weight by just eating potatoes might not be sustainable for years to come but, you get the point that there's just so many different types of diets out there. People have different preferences. Some people like to eat more fiber. Some people like to eat more potatoes. Some people like to eat more more meat. They can all work. So I think you shouldn't, like, like, make your diet decisions what other people tell you, if that makes sense. If you like a certain food and it helps you to stick to a diet then that's gonna that's that's gonna work for you. And that's the kind of idea behind the Ifit Fits Your Macros at least to a certain extent that you eat whatever you want as long as it fits into your daily calorie intake. Usually the if it fits your macros people still adhere to a certain daily targets so they still hit their daily protein goal, they still hit their daily micronutrient goals, and they still hit their like daily like carbohydrate goals and fat goals and then they fit the other in there. So it's more like 80% I'll eat the kind of pristine and clean diet and the 20% is gonna be maybe like a snicker's bar or whatever it is that they find satiating. So that's also like a pretty reasonable approach because you're just like leaving some room for the things that you find enjoyable. Like maybe some people like a piece of dark chocolate, other people like a glass of red wine and that helps them to stick to the diet. You know, there's so many diets, there's so many people out there and there's so many preferences. So one isn't inherently better or the other. The second part of the question is like supplements. To be honest, there's not a lot of supplements out there that like could have a significant effect on weight loss. If they're rare then obviously most people would take it. You know, there is one supplement that I have used myself and I've found to be effective for fat fat loss and that's johembein, but johembein is like this adrenergic and this cortisol increasing plant that does increase your heart rate, increases your energy expenditure, increases sweating and those kind of things, but I wouldn't use it like over a longer period of time because of those reasons. Like it just increases your heart rate too much, it can keep you up at night, it can reduce your sleep quality, so I don't take your heme buying on a regular basis maybe like a few times a year if I'm really trying to lose weight or lose fat, at a faster pace, but, I wouldn't recommend that you take it all the time because of this adrenergic signaling it has. And regular caffeine works through a similar mechanism so it increases your energy expenditure and increases like activity levels. So, regular caffeine and coffee intake is associated with lower body weights and lower obesity, lower diabetes as well and lower heart disease, but, the caffeine powders, I would be probably more careful with those because, yeah, it's very easy to overdose if you're taking like a pre workout powder or some other caffeine supplements. So I would, you know, I think drinking coffee and teas are beneficial, like they help with weight loss by reducing hunger and increasing energy expenditure, but the pre workout supplements I would probably not use myself. Next question, can you take antioxidant just after waking up or your risk to suppress normal cortisol spike? So antioxidant supplementation generally has little to no effects on cortisol levels and, I think there's no real effects if you take, like, antioxidants in the morning. It's not gonna have any effects on your cortisol levels, but, from a circadian rhythm standpoint and the best time to take antioxidants does appear to be before bed because that's where your antioxidant levels or antioxidant activity with other hormones also peaks. So when you're sleeping, that's when you produce the most melatonin. Melatonin has a lot of antioxidant effects. It also regulates glutathione and other anti inflammatory pathways. So it makes sense from a circadian rhythm standpoint that the best time to take antioxidants would be before bed. And, you know, things like NAC, if I were to take them, then I would take them before bed probably. Next question, are plant based protein powders made from a plus protein types comparable to whey protein? What are the advantages and disadvantages over whey protein powder? So, if you look at gram for gram, then the wheat protein, egg white protein, other animal protein powders are more bioavailable. They have more essential amino acids, and gram for gram, they result in greater protein synthesis and muscle growth, muscle hypertrophy response as well. But that's, you know, if you look at it gram for gram. So the plant proteins have less essential amino acids which explains those results and explains the lower protein synthesis response. If you look at studies, there are some studies that compare 30 grams of whey protein to 60 grams of wheat protein powder. They find that the 60 grams of wheat protein outperforms wheat protein, several hours later. So that's because you're just getting double the dose of the protein powder from the wheat protein. So if you have 30 grams of whey versus 60 grams of wheat protein, then the 60 grams is going to outperform whey because it's a larger dose. So, the the the lower quality of plant proteins can be overcome or improved upon if you just take a larger dose. So if you just consume 20 to 50% more of the plant protein then you're gonna get comparable results. It's just that, yeah, the whey protein is gonna get the same effect at a lower dose which doesn't mean that the plant protein wouldn't work if that makes sense. Next question, where do you measure your biomarkers? What company? So right now I'm measuring my biomarkers or blood markers, you know, two to three times per year and I'm doing them at the Ivo Clinic in India where I'm organizing my retreats. And I'm going there two and three times per year right now and I'm getting this a 180 comprehensive blood panel that looks at a 180 biomarkers and it's yeah pretty pretty awesome. It's just, you know, what I'd like to see. I'd like to see all the 180 biomarkers. There's no real reason to do it like, you know, more often than not that most people would generally just be fine by looking at some of the key blood markers once a year. So you just look at your lipids, inflammation, and white blood cells, and sex hormones. Once a year that's already good enough unless you change your routines dramatically or unless you're going through some health condition or unless you have lost a lot of weight or something like that and you wanna see the improvements then there's no real reason to do the blood work you know any more than once a year in my opinion for most people. I'm just doing it more often, more comprehensively because of, you know, kind of kind of doing it as a living, if that makes sense. Doing these different experiments, making content about it, and experimenting these things is, what I kinda need to do and I enjoy it as well. But, yeah, to answer the question, I'm doing that at the Iowa clinic. In the past, before I went to the clinic, I've done, like, regular blood panels at these private clinics here in Estonia. I haven't ever gotten like a regular blood panel from my doctor because they say like you're healthy, you're young, why do you want to do this? So you're probably not gonna get a blood panel from your doctor for like no reason unless you have a health concern they're not gonna give it to you. So fortunately in here in Estonia there is some private clinics you can just go there, get your get your blood drawn at a pretty cheap price as well. So this is what I would do before the clinic in India, but right now for the next few years I'll be doing it in the Iowa clinic. So a few times a year, this comprehensive blood panel. And if you wanna join me, then check out the link in the description. I'm going there several times a year. Next question. The aim is to live more, but is it not paradoxically the amount of time and resources that someone has to allocate to live longer also wasting their life? So that's a reasonable question, obviously. You know, if you're spending hours on your health and longevity trying to live longer, are you actually, like, just wasting your life and not living properly, if that makes sense? Well, it depends on the person and there's multiple, you know, answers to it. Some people like this. You know, Brian Johnson, he likes it. He enjoys it. I like it as well. I enjoy it. I like to exercise. I like to research and write books about it and create content about it and I like to eat healthy. I like to do those things. So I don't think it's a waste of time for me because the quality of my life is still higher as well. Like, the quality of my life is significantly higher right now if I'm really taking care of my health versus if I were to be obese or something like that. So you need to kind of think about, okay, what kind of life do you want to live and if it's worth it for you. For me, it is worth it. Some other people like, oh I can't go to parties or I can't drink alcohol. It's not worth it for me so therefore I'm not gonna do it or it's not worth it for me to spend, you know, multiple hours at a gym or multiple hours doing cardio because it's not worth it for me. Well, for me, it is worth it because I also enjoy it and the the benefits I get outweigh the cost. So it doesn't even feel like I'm sacrificing anything because that's what I like to do. That's what I think that's the goal. Like, you need to do things that you enjoy and if if being healthy and doing healthy things is what you enjoy then I think that's a win win so to say because you're enjoying the process while simultaneously extending your health span and extending your lifespan potentially into doing as well. So it's a double win if that makes sense. Now Brian Johnson also adds the caveat that he believes that we're at the verge of this, longevity escape velocity, which means that after a certain threshold, every year that it goes by, your life ex life expectancy increases by two years because of advancements in medical technology. So you're just staying alive so long that all the science and medicine keeps you alive for longer for every year that has passed. So this is an idea that he hasn't popularized. Obviously, it's been around for decades and there are many people who believe that I think we are heading in some direction like that. I don't think we're close enough to reach the actual longevity escape velocity maybe at least not in the next few decades, but what we do see is that the average life expectancy does increase and it does keep increasing. And the projections are that some of the longest living countries like South Korea and Switzerland, their average life expectancy is gonna be in the nineties by the end of the century. So people on average are gonna live into their nineties by the end of this century and that means that a lot of people will live into their hundreds as well. So I didn't think that that's what's gonna happen just by virtue of people staying healthier and you know having a healthier lifestyle overall. But the longevity escape velocity that's also like a potential. You know, how how big of a life extension we're gonna get from that, who knows. But, you know, it's it's still like a worthwhile idea to keep in mind. So like Brian Johnson thinks that okay, I'm gonna be super disciplined and super meticulous with my health for the next ten years and I'm gonna gain back fifty maybe a hundred years of extra life after the longevity escape velocity arrives. So that's also like I guess, you know, for him it's probably not a trade off because he also enjoys it as as for me. Like I enjoy my health and I enjoy these health routines and health optimization so I'm not losing anything in my opinion. I'm not losing anything by not drinking alcohol or not partying if that makes sense and I'm only gaining. So I guess you need to like think about what you want to do and if it's worth it for you. And the last question is does glycine increase DHT? Also in my studies glycine seems to be anti catabolic during calorie restriction. Have you heard of it? So the first part of the question, does glycine increase DHT? There's certainly no human studies finding that but there is one animal study that I did stumble upon that found that the glycine does increase DHT levels but again it's just one study and there's no other human studies about it. So I wouldn't like really I wouldn't say that glycine is going to have that effect and you know whether or not you want to increase DHT depends on your goals, if that makes sense. And then the second part of the question, does glycine reduce muscle catabolism? Then that is, yes. The glycine does reduce muscle catabolism or it has anti catabolic effects. So if you are, you know, severe calorie restriction or if you're fasting then glycine would theoretically also reduce the muscle catabolism in the process. Alright. That's it for this q and a. If you want to ask me a question then make sure you follow me on Instagram at simnund. On that, thanks for watching this video. Stay optimized, stay empowered.