The biomedical world actually has, missed this. And you see this right from bacteria, right up to humans and everything in between, all cell types. The ones that did develop this mechanism evolved these kinds of adaptations to various stressors, those are the ones that survived. Welcome to the SimNan podcast. I'm your host Sim Lund. Today, our guest is doctor Edward Calabrese. He's a toxicologist and a professor at the University of Massachusetts Amherst. Edward is one of the world's leading experts in hormesis, the concept of a dose response to a toxin or stressor that yields a positive adaptation. He's published dozens of papers and articles on the topic and has researched this for decades. In this episode, we're going to talk about the fundamental role of hormesis in longevity, biological resilience, aging, and what to do to become stronger and healthier as an individual. Edward, welcome to the show. Thank you very much. Happy to be here. Yes. I'm also very, excited to have you because, I actually, you know, wanted to do a podcast with you for several years, or at least I've known about your, research for several years, when I was learning about the concept of hormesis multiple years ago and then doing that process stumbling upon these different studies and papers that were like mostly written by you. So you've been like one of the pioneers in this field of stress adaptation and hormesis. So I'm really excited to have you on the show. No, thanks very much. I'm glad you got me before I dive. Good timing, right? Good timing. But, for the people who aren't aware of the idea behind hormesis, you know, we can start off with, what is this concept and why is it, like, so important, overall? Well, it's actually, it's a pretty fundamental question. What is hormesis? And I think the audience should know that it's, the definition that I give is hormesis by Calabres. I mean, there there are different, ways to look at this, and I'll try to explain how people, might see the concept of hormesis and and how it plays out. And I have a very broad conceptual perspective on it. And I think it it relates a lot to how I how I entered this this field of biology, and it really is different than than, most others who came on to it more recently. And and that is that I I I see hormesis as a as a biphasic dose response relationship. It's a low dose stimulation and a high dose inhibition. However, it's not just any type of biphasic dose response. As I came to learn, the hormetic stimulation and and dose response in general has very specific, quantitative features to it. And something that I didn't know when I first started, and I and I didn't know this for maybe a decade or so as I collected more and more information. And that is that I thought that the low dose stimulation could be, oh, gee, maybe threefold, fivefold, tenfold higher than the than the comparison control group. And when I set up my first database on this, I allowed for about a 400% increase stimulation, actually. But as I collected thousands and thousands of examples of what I thought were these pharmacists biphasic dose responses, I found that, in fact, that the maximum stimulation was, in general, quite modest. It really surprised me. It really didn't come anywhere near this fourfold or 400% increase. In fact, it was very uncommon for it to exceed twofold. And with, the maximum mostly occurring, and this is the maximum mostly occurring, only 30 to 60% greater than the control group. And that's really a very modest, increase. And this has huge, huge implications for, for, all sorts of biological applications. And so I began to take a look at at hormesis as a simply a biphasic dose response, ultimately having a certain quantitative features. And, and and then the the next issue for me was, well, most people were saying, well, is is hormesis, a beneficial response? Is it always beneficial? And and as I looked more into it, I could find yes. Most of the circumstances seem to be positive or beneficial, but I found different circumstances where, at least from a human perspective, that there could be variety of these pharmacologic like biphasic dose responses where that stimulation was, you might say, undesirable, could be harmful, that sort of thing. And so I and so in 2002, I wrote this paper called, defining hormesis with my colleague, Linda Baldwin. And and in it, we, more or less summarize some of the things that I'm talking about right now, and that is the quantitative features that hormesis could be both positive and negative depending upon the circumstances. And, even and and during that time period, the the during the nineties, I'm gonna say, there was a big explosion in toxicology dealing with endocrine disruptor chemicals. And and these, endocrine disruptor chemicals, when you looked at them, many of the studies showed these, inverted u biphasic dose responses. And these responses were, fit the hormetic dose response paradigm, dose response paradigm, extremely well. And to me, those were those were examples of, hermetic dose responses of, of an undesirable means. And and so and so I I I was looking at this very broadly. People in the endocrine world did not like the fact that I described their, dose response one of their common dose responses as a manifestation of hormesis. And and and, in fact, a number of years ago, there was a, a meeting that was held in Brussels, and it was really centered around my availability. And so I went out to Brussels, and there was this entire group of endocrine disruptor scientists. I don't know. It looked like about a 150, 200. And and I they they gave me the morning, more or less, to tell my hormesis ideas to them. And we we we discussed, debated, and so forth for, you know, the rest of that day, so or nearly so. But it it was really trying as as people trying to engage on low dose effects, the shape of the dose response, what does that mean? It really has, and we're gonna talk about, you know, things that relate to to adaptation and and health and so forth, extending life and and so forth. But I I come into this from a very, different sort of a perspective where I see hormesis in a very, broad framework and, where you could where you could have a wide variety of things that and and and the interesting thing is that the cell or the organism or the organ, seems to constrain their its capacity to to, increase its response on some of these integrative endpoints, to this 30 to 60%. This is a this is a a real mystery that that hasn't been been, clarified. And that it in the course of evolution, and you see this right from bacteria, right up to humans and everything in between, all cell types, independent of, you know, what induces it. And it actually doesn't even make any difference what the mechanism is that the quantitative features of this dose response are really the same. It's like there was this evolutionary, evolutionary, you know, process in in which this became, highly selected for and and maintained over all these these years. It's it's, it's a fundamental aspect of life. It's right from the very beginning. This episode is brought to you by Bone Charge, my favorite company for blue blocking glasses, red light therapy devices, and red light light bulbs. These items are essential for keeping your sleep wakefulness cycles aligned in a world that tries to mess them up. Instead of looking at your phone before bed and letting the blue light disrupt your melatonin production, why not wear blue blockers instead that prevent that from happening? Instead of having your bedroom lit up with bright lights, use the more sleep friendly alternative by opting for flicker free red light light bulbs that don't disrupt your sleep. Boncharge also has amazing infrared sauna blankets that can give you the same health benefits as the traditional sauna. You also get the unique benefits of infrared light that improves joint and skin health. Head over to boncharge.com/seamlond and use the code seam, s I I m, for a 15% discount. That's a good overview, and we definitely can talk about the details, a bit closer. But basically to give like a very simple as a description is that hormesis is this small stressor that that the body is like adapts to and ultimately has like a beneficial response. Whether that be you know it gets stronger, it strengthens its immune system, has like anti inflammatory effects or some other like positive adaptation in response to the stressor. And evolutionarily we were exposed to various like environmental stressors that triggered these adaptations and triggered these hormetic responses like from the environment whether that be cold or heat or low oxygen or whatever these type of stressors. And that's what, you know, is like a important aspect of survival for the organism to be able to adapt and to be able to, let's say, mount these positive adaptations to these, barriers in response to these different kinds of stressors. I would agree wholeheartedly with what you just said, except my explanation is actually even broader. And that is that I think you'll see that these hermetic dose responses even when the organism is not stressed. And that is when the organism is even in a growth phase. For example, if you take a look at, let's say cell proliferation, cell differentiation, you know, crop yields, things of that nature. They almost always follow this, hormetic dose response. If you stress the system, it surely will. And and and in fact, in 2008, when a colleague of mine, Mark Madsen, he wrote a follow-up paper to, you know, Baldwin and my paper called, you know, which we said was, you know, defining hormesis. Mark wrote a paper that said hormesis defined. And Mark's focus was exactly on what how you defined it, which was really taking a look at the, the adaptive response, the the the, you know, how you respond to stress and conforming to the the, the the principles of a hormetic dose response. And I think that if you were to take a look at how probably 90% of the, the scientists who research in this area, how they would view hormesis, it's exactly how you you defined it and how, Mark said it in his paper. And we said that as well, except we had a a broader perspective and and, and looked at not just under stress, stress conditions, but under regular, growth and and other types of biological conditions. But the the the unusual and hard to to understand thing is, is that is that in these conditions and these are conditions in which you might say they're anabolic when you're you could be, you know, synthesizing protein growing and so forth, or catabolic, which is more defensive. You you see the same, type of inverted u type of hermetic dose response, taking place. It's it's it's very, very general, very common. And the interesting thing is that the, the biomedical world actually has missed this in their, in their, in the in the last century and even into today's century. It's, when I take a look at when I do papers, and I've done a lot of papers, for example, on many different topics. One, we did 14 papers on on stem cells and hormesis. Right? And we did a couple on, wound healing. Many, many even even even the ones on on dietary supplements and so forth. When you look at and discover hormetic dose responses, they may be loaded with hormetic dose responses. Yet the papers that have these, the investigators have no understanding of what hormesis is. The term almost never use it. And and and kind of, like, we have to I have to come in there and try to educate people, who are, who who who observe hormesis but don't actually know the concept, the term, or what's going on in other fields. And this is a real problem within the scientific community that, I mean, for example, the field of aging embraced pharmacist twenty five years ago. The term, the concept, everything, and their their their language is very much, loaded, saturated with with the hormesis concepts, terminology, and everything else. But you look at other other, biological disciplines that also observe these by biphasic dose responses, they have they never read the the, the aging literature, the bio gerontology literature. They have no idea that the the inverted u shaped dose response that they see is an example of hormesis. It it it tells me that these different, subdivisions of biology never know what what the other subdivisions are doing. And there's very little communication between them, and and that's one of the the major challenges that that that I face. And and in fact, every paper just about now, the last two years, three years, I've I have I have to try to overcome this. I I put a, about a half a page introduction hormesis overview so that people in wound healing, stem cells, and others can at least see, you know, this brief summary of what the concept of hormesis is that that they are reporting, but actually not knowing the name and everything else of, of what they are are about. But this has huge, educational implications and and, biological implications, and it really slows down the, the the scientific progress if people don't understand the concept that they're studying and how it relates to other disciplines within biology and biomedicine and and affecting the clinic clinical, outcomes of different studies. Yeah. So like hormesis as a phenomenon is, you know, with such broad implications in medicine, and longevity and, you know, many other fields as a whole. And it certainly is, yeah, like I think very underlooked in my opinion, as well. But, we can we can like take a little step back as well and to talk about what are the, you know, the most, let's say basic examples of hormesis that, people, you know, experience themselves. Like one of them I can say is like, you know, exercise is like a very good example of hormesis, but many people don't know that it is this kind of a positive stressor. Well, you know, I'd say that that, it's it's kind of strange, but every everything that you, experience, it's a stress in life. It will ultimately manifest itself with within a home medic context, whether it is in exercise or whether it's in psychological stress. You know, you are you have, what we're doing right now. I mean, my my your brain is working pretty hard, and my brain's working pretty hard, and we're stressing, ourselves. We might not see it as such, but but, yeah, that would actually be another example of a of a hormetic type of dose response. When you, people many people do, intermittent fasting or they have caloric restriction built into a lifestyle. And and and that that actually involves a certain level of biological stress to two different systems. And whether you're reducing certain nutrient intakes that the cell then perceives and then then institutes various biological adaptations changes to that, that that's that's a, another example of hormesis in in daily life, put it that way. I'd say, many people take various types of dietary supplements. I take my fair share of dietary supplements, and, many of these, have, they they they provide an oxidant stress to my cells. And and that oxidant stress will ultimately up regulate some adaptive mechanisms that I hope will be translated into into positive biological effects, you know, for me. Other things, for example, this is most people wouldn't recognize this, but I've looked at many different, pharmaceuticals that are out on the market that have been approved. And and and these are, you know, things like anxiolytic drugs or, I'd say, anti seizure drugs, osteoporosis drugs, drugs that can grow hair, things of that nature. You go and you look at the the preclinical studies, and those are the studies that are with the animal models that provide the basis for how they would ever test them in a human. And when you go back and you look at the animal studies, they there, they use multiple doses and they try to figure out the optimal dose, does it work and so forth. And and, in almost every case, what you find is an inverted u shaped hormetic dose response that conforms to the to the quantitative features of of the the hormetic dose response. You know, for example, I also looked at about two about 200 or so, agents that can improve memory in rodent models. Okay? You go and you look at these dose responses. I mean, they follow perfectly within a hormetic dose response. It's actually pretty amazing to to me. And then but when but when, they're ultimately tested within a clinical trial, that while the the pharmaceutical company, they choose the optimum dose or maybe two doses that they're gonna look at, They never get a real dose response. And and I'm not sure they know what they have what they're they're selling to the public is a harmetically acting agent. But, yes. And and it is. And and the interesting thing with hormesis, the way I'm looking at it, and if you only can can increase the maximum by 30 to 60%, then you might say, well, well, what what does that mean? Well, it means that you have a very limited, very limited, you know, up regulation quantification that you have, whether that's how much can you improve memory, how much can you improve lifespan, how much can you, how fat how much hair can you grow? All these all these sorts of things. They are they're actually gonna be, determined, actually by the concept of hormesis. Hormesis rules our life in many ways, and hormesis will determine the extent to which we can, you know, enhance our healthy lifespan and enhance our, our longevity as well. How much how much gain do we have in our system? Yeah. You mentioned the inverse u shape association. So, basically, it's like in it's like like a bell curve or a mountain and kind of that in one end, if the stimulation or the dose of the agent or whatever stressor is small, then it doesn't have this positive effect. If it's too much, then it also is like, negative. But yeah, like you said, in the thirty percent to sixty percent range, that's where the positive effects come from. So it's like it's like not not low, not high, but, you know, just enough kind of. Yeah. You are actually the most you at the optimum, you can get about 30 to 60% increase. But my my concerns with with hormesis are that, the the where you get your benefit, this 30 to 60% increase, if you take, too much beyond that dose they got you that, you it'll begin to, drop down. It'll begin to decrease. And if you take too much, then you could actually go into a, a negative zone. Actually, what I call a modestly toxic zone. And and I have to tell you that I I have, I'm I'm a son of a crazy exerciser. I do an awful lot of exercise. And, and and I I would have to say that, you know, typically I might do an hour, hour and twenty minutes of aerobic exercise a day, something like that. But for for a while, I was doing far more than that. Put it that way, much longer for a prolonged period of time. And and and I actually started to develop what I'd call, signs of having exercise too much. I developed all kinds of I'm gonna call them the the beginnings of, of adverse effects from excessive excessive exercise. And it's also tied into how old you are. I mean, I I when I was younger, I I don't I think that it would take much more exercise before I I I left the the positive zone. At my age, I suspect that the that the maximum that I can take is, and then duration is is even though I do a lot, is is less than what it was if I was 25 to 45 years of age, you know, something along that line. There's there's some everything has to be adjusted to to who the individual is and and where they are. What what is your optimal dose response might not be the same as my optimal dose response. There's a lot of inter individual variability, that that, and and so one has to really, look at this. And this is this is this plays out within, within the the pharmaceutical world where you say, well, this this, or the supplement world, this supplement of 300 that everybody might take for a particular agent, well, actually, there's going to be a lot of inter individual variability depending on our own biochemistry. And so what might be good for one person might, might not be as good for another or might be, you know, optimal. I mean, there's there's a lot of, a lot of, challenges within how to tailor, you know, our lifestyle for, you know, what's the optimal level of exercise for you? It's gotta be different than for me. And and how do we figure that out and and and things of that nature? That's that that's a real challenge for, I'm gonna just say, the public health community, which I and I don't think the public health community has much of an understanding of parmesis at all. I mean, I think that I agree. Their their their their their view of, their view of, you know, optimizing health is don't smoke, you know, you know, don't drink to excess, you know, modestly exercise. They have, they have no idea that hormesis runs their biology. They have no idea that low doses of stress in many different forms optimize. They have no idea, that, that the maximum benefit you can get out of something is is modest and that you don't need a lot of money to actually live healthy. You have to you have to have knowledge to live in a healthy way. And that and that's and that's the value of of having, I think the understanding of these basic biological concepts. Yeah. It's like I guess most people just gravitate towards one end or the other in the bell curve. Like, they either are completely sedentary and living unhealthy lifestyle with no of none of these positive stressors or they're, like, really hard, or very hard in like this very go getters, like they're super into this kinds of positive stressors. And they're doing a lot of them and different types of them all the time. So it's like, yeah, like the most optimal results come from in like the moderation and somewhere in the middle. So like you don't want to be no stress but you don't want to be under chronic stress and too high amounts of stress either. Well you know it's interesting in terms of you know how this this is evolving. I've seen, you know, in in the audience should know that back in the, back in the nineteen eighties, when I kind of now reacquiring my interest in the concept of hormesis, There's a big, big data base out there called the Web of Science that I tend to use a lot. And, and in that database in the 1980s, the entire decade of the 1980s, hormesis was used as a term, cited as a term, in about 10 to 15 times per year total total. Last year in the Web of Science database, it was over 20,000. And so the interest in hormesis has grown, phenomenally, you know, since, I'll say since I my reintroduction to it in the in the mid nineteen eighties. You know, so it's forty years and it's gone from, you know, 10 to over 20,000. And even even though it's grown a lot, it's still you still have that frustration that even, you know, when I mentioned before that so many areas in the biological and biomedical sciences don't appreciate it or don't understand it or don't know it. But, but nonetheless, you know, I'd have to say that there has been a great growth in the scientific, study of hormesis. I used to have problems when I was submitting papers to journals in the 1990s that they the editors wouldn't even know what the term was, what it meant. They made it much more difficult to get papers accepted. I'd have to have sometimes, four reviewers from my papers instead of, like a standard of two or something like that. And I and I can tell today, the last fifteen years or so, maybe last twenty years, there's been a a real, education at the level of the journal editor where they, they, they seem to understand that this is a a fundamental concept, and and it's much more, much more, now built into the into the, publication system so that people can actually do something, with that knowledge. Yeah. But it's How did you Go ahead. Yeah. How how did you, like, discover the concept in the first place? Yeah. Yeah. I was actually 20 year I was 20 years old when it happened for me, and I was an undergraduate in a taking a plant physiology class, and we had to do a whole lot of different experiments, some in the lab, some in the greenhouse. And and one of our studies that professor made us do was was to do a dose response relationship with a plant growth inhibitor, a synthetic inhibitor. And we were working with peppermint plants. And and I remember, I mean, we had so many different experiments to do. I I couldn't even remember how that that particular one was going. And this guy comes into our classroom, and he I remember he came in in November 1966. Okay? And, when I was a junior in third year in college, and and he says he said the the the the effects of this chemical on the peppermint, they're stimulating the plant. And we do this every year, and and they're always inhibited. He said, I don't know what's going on with your with your little experiment there, but but something is, unusual and not right. And so he said, maybe you used the wrong chemical, maybe you mislabeled something. I don't know. I don't know what's going on. If anybody's interested, come back and see me. The only person in my class who was interested enough to go back was me. And so I went back, and then he forced me to do the experiment over this time, looking over my shoulder as I made up my solutions and everything. And and we concluded he he concluded that I made a dilution error when I made up my original stock solution. And I ended up giving the peppermint plants about tenfold less than they should have got. I put them into a low dose zone. And so he said, wow. So you're now gonna have to give your plants the low dose, give them what I wanted, which was the high dose, and we'll see what happens. So when I did that, I got this low dose stimulation and a high dose inhibition. I saw exactly what he thought we would get at the high doses, and I could see again this this stimulation. I said, well, I guess we've answered the question. He said, no. He says he says, now you just have one one one decent experiment. You're gonna have to replicate that and show that you can get that result again and then again. He made me replicate that study about it almost a dozen times. And then I said, I'm done. I'm I'm convinced that this these plants, act in a biphasic way. I didn't even know the term hormesis. They were going up by about 60 or so percent. He said, well, I I now agree with you. He said, now what I want you to do is I want you to see if you can avoid applying the chemical to the soil because the bacteria and other things might be metabolizing in a certain way. Do the whole study again, but this time do it in hydroponics. Do it in solution. Avoid the soil. And if you can still get the the, the stimulation, then you'll be pretty much certain that it's the chemical itself rather than a metabolite from the bacteria that's present in the soil. And I did that, and I got the same low dose stimulation, high dose inhibition. I only had to replicate that about five or six times for them. And, ultimately, we we did publish this, work without you. I just as I said, I didn't know the term hormesis. Published it in a British, plant physiology journal. And, I just said it was a low dose stimulation and a high dose inhibition. And that's and that was and that was first started in the ninth in 1966, 1967. Still have my my original notebook. And, and that's how I got started on it. And then as it turns out, I, I, I was I the guy worked me to death, though, when I was when I was doing this. And I said, I never want to do plant work again. So I went to graduate school and became an insect well, I went to graduate school to be an insecticide toxicologist. And so and then it was, 1985, almost twenty years later, I saw that there was this conference out in California going to be on this thing called radiation hormesis. And that's when I first heard the term. So I looked at I looked at the brochure they had, and they talked about this biphasic dose response. And they said, you know, we know a high dose of radiation can be harmful, cause cancer, and so forth. But we think low dose of radiation may actually, reduce cancer risk, extend life, things of that nature. So I said, well, I'm gonna call this guy up and talk to him. So I called him up because I said, biology is biology. If I saw a biphasic dose response with plants, with respect to dose, then what they're talking about with radiation, maybe this is the same biological process. I don't know. So I called the guy up, and, and I spoke with him, told him my story that I just shared with the audience here. And he invited me to go out to their conference to, but to focus not on radiation, but on chemical examples of this pharmacist concept. And so I worked with a few graduate students. We put together a paper, and and that actually so we attended that first conference, got our paper in the proceedings. And then what happened for me was that two years four years later, the conference director and one of the the co directors, they had a big paper in science called radiation hormesis point counterpoint, and they debated it. And that re that's actually what got me restarted on this because I said, well, they still are they're acting confused. And and we have to actually resolve this because this is an important concept. And so from then 1990 to the present time, I've just been, you know, like, gung ho going crazy, putting a lot of time onto, onto trying to figure out first if the harmesis concept was real, how general was it, what were its biological features, and and then, just getting progressively more knowledgeable, you know, and and and learning. So the the last 30, thirty five years now, I mean, I've, that's, I've really put a lot of time on it, but, but for me, it really goes back to the mid nineteen sixties. So where I was at undergraduate. And so now I'm 77 years old now. And so so I'd have to say that I've been, I've at least introduced to that concept fifty seven years ago and and seen a lot of, a lot of changes. A lot a lot of great growth, actually. Yeah. Yeah. That's, like really fascinating. And, yeah, like by now, I think it is a very well recognized concept, or at least like we know that it's real. And it's been replicated, you know, in hundreds of different experiments and, in different You know, it's it's interesting that you say that because I, I had a lot of evidence for it being real and you could reproduce it. And in the late 1990s, I, I, submitted, about six papers to the the top toxicology journal in, in The United States. And and each of my papers got a decent review, but the editor in chief, rejected my papers. So I was really I was concerned. And so what I did was I decided that I would have a big debate with these with people. And so I ran a conference here at the University of Massachusetts in in January 2000 in which I I wanted to because I had a lot of evidence on hormesis by that point. And and I and and I felt that that that I was getting papers rejected in in the leading journals that I that I should be getting published. And so so I I said, I want to debate these people. And I didn't think that anyone was had any harsh feelings towards me. I just thought that this was they didn't understand what I was doing. So I I got the the editor in chief. He agreed to come out and debate. Then I got, a former head of The US, National Cancer Institute to come out and other other leading people like that. I brought in about six of them, seven of them, to debate me. About 250 people showed up. It was over three days. And, and and and the first day, I was all devoted to me. I spoke for for seven hours on what I had learned about hormesis. That's the second day, the these seven speakers spoke, and and then on the third day, we tried to see where we were. And it was interesting that the the the, I mean, I got a lot I thought I did a good job at explaining myself, but I got hit with a lot of criticisms. But one of the the biggest criticism that I got was that you didn't have a mechanism to explain, to explain this. You could have all these studies, and all these studies could be good, and you could replicate them. But the the editor told me that unless you had a mechanism, I'm not gonna publish your papers in my journal. That's it. I don't care what you said. And so I I knew at that point that that the that the the that it was all gonna turn on whether you could come up with, mechanistic explanations. And and I would have to say that that was very inspirational and educational for me because we spent most of our time finding trying trying to come up with underlying hormetic mechanisms that could make them comparable to what is known in the world of pharmacology and high level toxicology. And I would have to tell the audience that actually we have achieved that goal. And that is that a number of years later, I published a paper that had 400 mechanisms of 400 different hormetic dose responses at the level of receptor cell signaling and so forth. And I'd have to say, when you look at all these papers in the last ten years or so, more than that, that all these papers now have very strong mechanistic components. The work on hormesis is comparable to any other level in, in pharmacology and toxicology with respect to mechanistic understanding. So we've played by the games the rules that have been established by the field to try to say, yeah, hormesis is real. Harmases is reproducible. We have mechanistic understandings of it. And and these are the mechanisms and they're reproducible. And and and and so this is this is the, and and I think that's why the field has grown. Is it that kind of, even though that was, you know, what I call, tough love with that conference, I got a lot of criticism. But I listened, I listened to the, the criticisms, and try to try to answer these criticisms so that, so that I could grow and this concept could be fairly tested. And, and, and it's passed, it's passed every test, actually, as it as it's gone forward. Yeah. So what are like what's the mechanisms? We don't have to go through the entire 400 of them. But like, what are like a broad picture, overview of like why does certain stressors have these positive adaptations and benefits? Like what what happens inside the body when you are let's say exercising or when you are exposed to some sort of low level biphasic toxin or some other agent? Well, I think that the the clearest thing that's emerging today, put it that way, and that is that various kinds of stress can result in modest elevations of what I'd say in your cells of something called reactive oxygen species, what we call ROS. And and these are, agents that can stress the cell to some and and at too high a dose, they can cause they can cause all sorts of, toxicities. But they also can act as signaling molecules, as well. And these, the ROS, what it that what it really does is it it activates, various pathways, to, without getting into into too much detail, but it but it it activates, various, transcription factors that can, then mobilize and and mobilize the synthesis of a whole amata of, antioxidant enzymes within cells that can be then used to protect cell membranes, organelles like the mitochondria and and and and so forth against damage. And and in fact, this is this is, this is this is really what what is, going on with exercise and going on when when when you have, supplements that are fundamentally, modest, little oxygen stressors, things of that nature. They're they're pulsating little stresses into your biological systems. These these, oxygen stresses activate, cell signaling that ultimately leads to the to the, synthesis of antioxidant enzymes that ultimately protect cells from damage. And and and that's what what I try to do with when with my life, that's why I exercise, why I take certain supplements, things of that nature, is I'm always trying to modestly stress systems so that they can activate, various types of, I'm gonna say chemo preventive, strategies. And and it's and it's interesting. It doesn't it's it's it's very interesting to me because when you look at different pathways and so forth, it doesn't actually make any difference what pathway gets activated, what receptor is is is used, or things of that nature. The dose response features always come out the same. This is this is really very interesting. If you if you take, 20 different, supplements and you study them separately and they're all hormetic and they might even have different mechanisms, they're they're the quantitative features of their dose responses are are essentially identical. They're all conforming to this to this, quantitative features of this hormetic dose response. This is not really appreciated by many people, but it's what I see in in all the work that I do. And and it's, and I and I don't really see exceptions to it. This this always, shocked me in the beginning, and then and then it's, it's exactly what seems what seems to go on no matter what system that you're working at. And and whether it's stem cells or whether it's skin cells for for wound healing or whether it's, you know, neuroprotective work, a lot of work has been done on, like, let's say, female reproduction and the oocyte. And when you try to protect the oocyte, things of that nature, they all respond harmetically. They all show the exact same quantitative features of the dose, and many of the same agents that are effective in one system are effective in the other. And that's because they're they're acting on really the same mechanisms. They're they're generating, some low level oxygen stress within systems. And the body's detecting that and then up regulating, adaptive mechanisms. Yeah. Is are those, mechanisms, like, conserved across different species, through evolution or are there, like, different mechanisms in plants versus, humans? I mean, I mean, like, you know, the broad mechanism, like the upregulation of antioxidant defense or stuff like that? Yeah. They're present in everything. Actually, every cell, every type of living creature. In our world where people try to study aging and things like that, they study it in little nematode worms, you know, this C. Elegans worm. So far from a human yet their strategy is so similar. And their, enzymatic repair and defensive capacities, their genetic analogs very much match up with ours, you know, almost perfectly. And so to actually have survived in this world, every single living creature is alive today because they developed these defense mechanisms and then, and then their ancestors pretty much retained them. And you would have thought that, that, that, that they would have been, you know, how does this progress over over the, you know, millions and millions of years? But when when you take a look at how bacteria respond to stress, their their dose response features I mean, bacteria, right, and yeast, these sorts of fungi, they're they're the quantitative features of their dose responses are really just like ourselves, just like ourselves. And and so whatever the the, the strategy was, it's been it's been, found to be very successful. And, yeah, and it's been preserved over these, over these eons of time that that, you know and and this is interesting because you would think that the world of evolutionary biology would have picked up on the centrality of hormesis. And and that and that's just another discipline in biology that for the most part has, has missed the hormesis concept. And and so I I'm kinda seeing these, different disciplines as playing they're they're gonna have to play catch up. And we in this area have to actually be the, the guiding light and and the the stimulator for getting these other other disciplines involved. Because once you start getting the power of their thinking and their technologies, they can move us much further ahead so quickly because, they're experts in their own zone. And, and you, you want them to start thinking of your ideas because your ideas will enhance them. But then when it all synergizes together, it's much better for, for our human understanding. Yeah. It's, you know, basically in many ways, the reason why we are here is because of hormesis. So like, or that our ancestors, not only human ancestors, but you know, single cell organisms, they, the ones that did develop this mechanism or the ones that did, let's say, evolve these kinds of adaptations to various stressors, those are the ones that survived, and everyone else, pretty much didn't survive. So, yeah, like, it's pretty much, kind of the survival of the fittest kind of a quote that gets tossed around in, when we're talking about evolution and that kind of thing. Well, I have to say that that's one of the causes of how we eventually die. And that is that our hormetic mechanisms, my the hormetic my hormetic capacity at this age is far far less than the, the capacity, let's say, at your age. And and that that one has to, this is this is a real component for for, I'm gonna just say for geriatric medicine or medicine in general, and that is, it's it's so I mean, done done a lot of work with the animal model studies and things of that nature. And And you can see when you're studying hormetic dose responses in young rodents, and how they respond and usually quite robustly, when you get them into being what I call elderly rodents, you know, over two years of age, things of that nature, their capacity to respond, they're not responding nearly as well as as, in fact, the, the younger, the younger version of themselves. And but I've also seen there are so so some of these pathways seem to decay, with with time. But I've also seen, well, in studies where investigators have been able to to rejuvenate, you might say, decayed pathways, get them functioning again, and to, and to breathe more life into the, I'll say, the elderly mouse and rat models that we that have been studied. And I've actually seen in in China, there was a a very significant study, several studies, looking at people who are over 90 years old who had had minor strokes. And they they gave them a a a treatment. It was a hormetic treatment. And and as it turns out, those who got the treatment, those who didn't get the treatment, and the ones who got the treatment, their risk of getting a subsequent stroke was reduced by eighty five percent compared to those who didn't. I mean, it was actually pretty and that told me that, yeah, even, even when you're over 90, you still have, this, this capacity to respond. And it's, it's very, very impressive, along to, to me. And and also even some of these fundamental, concepts here. Yeah. Yeah. There's an aging component, and and it just means that that, people who are who are older have to, have to work, really with a with a good focus to make make sure that they can resist some of these, decrements of age to sustain their adaptive capacities. And there are all sorts of things that that are happening. For example, you know, in in the rodent area, if you have a very obese, let's say, young mice or rats, and you have tried to, and and they're they're they're more or less, non obese counterparts have very strong of hormetic, capacity. The these these highly obese younger animals, they lose a lot of, hormetic adaptations. However, you you have them lose their weight, and then they actually not only do they benefit from the loss of weight, but they also then that's tied to developing other adaptive capacities. So there's lifestyle and there's age, and there are a lot of factors that that can that's fine tune. And they're all they're all tied together. You know, they're they're it's interesting. They're all they're all linked together in terms of, ultimately helping the body to survive, you know, and and live a more healthy life. Yeah. Like, obese people or, metabolically sick people, do have, like, you know, weaker immune systems. They, have other, like, chronic diseases as as what happens with, aging, like the older you get, the weaker your immune system generally becomes and, and your risk of other chronic diseases also goes up. And, you know, you can yet tie it together with some of the decline in the you know, antioxidant defense status and just other overall health markers as well like you know, the gluophan level which is the body's master antioxidant that starts to decline after like the age of 45. But if you're like, following unhealthy lifestyle, then it probably happens sooner. And if you follow a healthier lifestyle, then you can probably postpone it a bit longer as well. Well, you know, it's it's interesting. I I think that that most people think that they're invincible to disease until you get to, you know, an an elderly age. But but you can see just on the statistics that there are so many things that happen adversely once you, pass the age of 60. You know, there's so many you know, increase in so many different neurological diseases or cancers or other kinds of things. And and and there's a, and and I think once disease processes start, it's it's really hard to stop them. They're very powerful, progressive conditions. And and and what has really led me to to think about and that is that the people really at a much younger age need to start to, have this hormetic lifestyle. Because I think that once you once you have, let's say, I I believe based on all this research that we have we have looked at and done, that, I mean, you could take different diseases, such as Parkinson's and Alzheimer's and others, and you can probably slow down the onset and the severity, if you started at an earlier time period, you know, so that you you you're actually, pushing off this harmful effect because of you're resisting it. But once the disease if if you haven't been practicing that hormetic lifestyle and the disease begins to show itself clinically, then you say, oh, what am I gonna do? I have I just got, you know, told I have, early stage Alzheimer's or early stage Parkinson's or something like this. It's it means it's already pretty far along to be diagnosed clinically. And so and so putting a hormetic, you know, push at that point, I don't know if it can do much to be helpful. I think it could be really helpful earlier on, you know, in the, in the lifespan to then, you know, reduce the, slow down the onset and and reduce the the severity of it. So these are really public health, you know, challenges and questions that that, governments and and universities and and and and other groups, you know, need to see to ultimately, you know, make people, aware that, actually, when you're over 60, your health is really gonna be determined by what you did when you were 30 and 40. And and and this and it's and this is the it's a long game. It's a it's a and it takes planning and education. And and and just when you just because you think you look in the mirror, oh, I'm young and I'm this and I'm that, I don't have to worry about this until this is when you, this, this is when, this is when the game is going on for protecting yourself for a healthier, older age. Yeah, absolutely. You know, it's all, it's, it's a lifespan, you know, hormetic strategy. And and it really, you know, if we really, you know and and there's there's examples where it really starts hormesis starts, you know, it actually starts, in the womb when you are, you know, embryo and fetus. And, and, and then these, you know, how you're treated and so forth during this early developmental time will impact, you know, so the game begins as soon as you're conceived. And, And, and in fact, I have seen in work that we've been doing on, on all sites and so forth, it actually begins right after fertilization. Actually, it begins before fertilization because you're it's how you how you protect the the ovum, how it develops, how it resists stresses. And then you can affect, you know, how you know, how this inner cell mass that'll become the embryo, grows and develops. And and they all respond to a hormetic stimuli. I mean, I've seen hormesis from before the start of life to after the start of life to right near death. And hormesis is embodied in in the entire lifespan. And and you can impact it. You you actually can impact, the in the animal husbandry and other things. You can impact the quality of life by imposing pharmacists, treatments, you might say, to unfertilized eggs before they get fertilized. And that can enhance the quality of life. I mean, it starts it's a whole cycle. It's a whole cycle. And and it's it's it's a new way of thinking about biology and health and and the environment. And it's all anything that has a dose response, and that's everything, is gonna have to deal with this pharmacist concept. Yeah. I'm gonna try to give, some sort of a statement to describe it. Otherwise, you can correct me if I'm wrong or, directed in a better direction. But, you know, since the moment you're conceived, you're dying, or, you know, life is a process of dying, or getting closer to the death and everything in life imposes some form of stress. Every like everything in our environment imposes some form of a stress in some amounts, whether that even like, you know, breathing and, just electromagnetic fields or the Earth's magnetic field of whatever those those are imposing some form of stress. And, like the natural tendencies like entropy that we are heading towards death and in a state of continuous like decline and let's say degradation. And, hormesis is this adaptation to these kinds of stressors to keep the organism alive so that it could, you know, in some sense, like, I guess the main goal is to like reproduce or reproduce the genes and carry on the genes. So hormesis is a small stress to keep the organism alive, to get it through the stress so that it would survive the stress. And in a future scenario where there is less stress, it could reproduce again or continue reproducing. And, it's like a signal for the body to stay alive and to not die or to, like, slow down the process of dying and slow down the process of entropy and in so doing slow down like aging as well? Well, I think that's that kind of puts it together. I think that, the, and just for the audience to just really appreciate, and and that is, as I I kind of emphasized repeatedly, and that is that, the strategy that All Wife seems to have adopted, is that this this maximum of hormetic stimulation is modest, and it's only about 30 to 60%. And there's gotta be a reason behind that. And we've thought a lot about what those reasons could be. But, but that's what all life seems to show. It all, all life shows a hormetic response. It all shows that it's, that it's, a modest response. That makes it very challenging to prove you have hormesis. The audience should know that because trying to prove a 30 to 60% increase that's why my original advisor made me replicate my study so many times, because he wanted to see how, you know, how do you know it's not just by background variability and chance? How do you, how do you know that? Well, you know that by, by being able to reproduce it. And then ultimately, you know that because you have, found the mechanism, and if you block the mechanism, you block the protection. All those things have been done and things of that nature. But, yeah, this is this is central to, central to life, all life on this planet. Farm life, your dogs, your cat, your your grandmother and grandfather, and, the little embryo that's developing and everybody in between. It's, this is a central feature of evolutionary biology. And and, and I I I think that this is, hopefully, it'll get more known as we go down the road. Yeah. So you mentioned the 30 to 60%, response. So like so you can expect to gain 30 to 60% of benefits compared to the the placebo or the control group. That's it. That's that's it optimal. So that that's even at optimal. A lot of times. Say, if you and I were to, if we have a number of people taking the same treatment, we may find that that what's optimal for you, you might get 30 to 60%. I might only get 15%. You know, we might be we're in that kind of, hermetic, inverted u, but but it's really only the optimal. And and how do you how do you optimize that response? I mean, that that takes a lot of work work to do that. Not only almost anybody knows, you know, how to optimize it for an individual. This is a, this is a really a, you know, I'm, when I'm, when I'm exercising, to be honest with you, I'm supposed to be like Mr. Hormiz, this sort of a guy. Right? And my wife says to me, she says, how do you know what the optimal, duration and intensity is for your hormetic response? Is that different than than hers? Is it different than somebody else's and so forth? And I said, well, nobody actually knows that. You know, what do you know what's optimal for you? And, and I have to say for myself, because I I take I do so many things and I take a variety of some, what I think are hermetic based supplements, but I have to make sure that I'm not causing myself toxicity by doing too much. And so a number of times a year, I have my blood tested for, let's say liver damage or kidney damage. Could I be causing it? Because I'm actually, going over the top and doing too many things, right? I'd have to say that I've never shown myself to have entered into, at least, from those tests, into the toxicity zone. I know that I have exceeded it on the exercise because of, I, I had a whole series of, of, overuse and over exercise, symptoms. So I had to cut back on what I was doing. And then then those symptoms actually went away. And and so so I think that that, you know, understanding that there is a inverted you, that too little isn't isn't right, too much can be harmful. You have to find, you know, that what they call that the Goldilocks zone or the this, this optimal zone. And and, and and this is this is what what public health and this is what, you know, medicine really has to strive for. And, and even there are so many other applications, you know, that they could, we haven't even talked about these. For example, many people have surgeries and so forth that can be planned and different investigators have shown that you can even do, you know, preconditioning to, to, stress yourself before a major stress event to, you know, protect yourself against, all the stress you'll have from a surgical endeavor or it, or it could be, you know, something else. I mean, even when you are going through major, radiation treatments, I mean, you could, you could pretreat yourself prior to the radiation actually, and you could reduce, the degree of, let's say or other damage that the high dose of radiation are causing to your body. You, there are a lot of things that people could do that they, they don't even, the system doesn't even think about, doesn't allow you to think about, doesn't even, it's not on their radar screen, but, but to the thinking person who knows this, you can, you can, you can, you can make a difference for yourself, but you'd like to have a difference made for all society. So that these, these things are built in, you know, built in, and, and, and make the system work better so that people could come out of it more healthy than they went into it. You know, that, that sort. Yeah, like the, I think one one form of this preconditioning hormesis that I guess the mainstream medicine might use or I've heard that they have used is the use of like some form of innovative fasting or fasting mimicking diet together with chemotherapy that that supposedly reduces like the negative side effects from chemotherapy. And, it's another form of this preconditioning your body before a larger stressor, which then makes the larger stressor smaller or have less of a negative effect. And that would be an example. That's that that's that that that's, you know, a a current one that's emerging in the last, you know, few years, you know, that that sort of thing. And and and there's all sorts of, examples of of preconditioning prior to stress, you know, that that sort of thing. And, but also there there's there were such things as postconditioning. That's this is we talk about doing something in advance, but but actually, you can be if if you were exposed to let's say you had a a stroke or you had an act a brain traumatic damage or something like that, there are there are people, there's definitely good research that shows that if you intervene within a certain period of time after the damage, I mean, after the damage, it's a limited window, but but but you can enter enter into with a a hormetic stress that will out and call it a postconditioning treatment that, can well, I find a different mechanism than than the preconditioning, but you can get the same degree of protection. And and I've seen that in, on the brain, on on the heart, and so forth. It's it's, as biologically real as preconditioning and and as effective, that that sort of thing. It these are these are all part of, you know, I don't know what's gonna happen, like, a hundred years from now or two hundred years from now, but there there's gonna be, you know, just a a wealth of, new possibilities for future generations. I mean, we're, we're in many ways, pioneers with an idea and pointing the way. We really are pointing the way, kind of like the Wright brothers with a with an airplane, you know, that sort of thing. And to see to see space travel today. So we're kind of the Wright brothers when it comes to biological adaptations. A hundred years from now, two hundred years from now, I mean, I I I tell you, I think that things could be it it would just be amazing to see how people build upon and take this these these concepts and then apply it. I mean, it's it's very, very, the potential is, interesting. I don't know what new technology will do to the 30 to 60% zone because we're really constrained within a biological context here, you know, whether whether, CRISPR technology and and other things will will come in to try to modify these and so forth. I but this you know, it's something that's so so general and built into every single organism. I'm I'm a little bit fearful that if you if you found a way to increase the hermetic maxima to, like, threefold or fourfold, you know, what what that might be that might be harmful to the overall survival interest of, of the organism or cell? I mean, these are biological questions, you know, that, that people will ultimately be testing in the laboratory. I mean, I mean, I this is like way down the road, but maybe not that far down the road, you know, where people say, I mean, you get thirty to sixty percent. I can break those restrictions and get you to for example, like an Alzheimer's patient. You know, you may be able to take an Alzheimer's patient who can't, find his way to the bathroom or put on his shoes, then you might give a treatment. So now he can find his way to the bathroom and put on his shoes. You might say, well, okay, that's a 20% improvement. Maybe I can do get them up to, you know, a 100%. You know, I can I can keep improving on this with these, with new approaches and so forth? I I I Right. I I this is, you know, the thing, how things will be, will be in fifty years, hundred years, be very, very interesting. And, human creativity is, pretty impressive. So I, I I'm, I'm hopeful on, you know, that, that, that things will be refined much more. And as I said, I think that we're the Wright brothers when it comes to, this public health, revolution that we're talking about today. There really is a revolution in thinking. Yeah. I agree with that. And, we can maybe mention like, okay, so we know the basic idea of hormesis, we know that it's like this positive stressors. So like, you can give maybe some examples that people can utilize in their everyday life to engage in some hormesis, you know, of course exercise and, some form of dietary restriction that we mentioned already. So like, what are you you can also like mention like what you do in terms of your daily routine to, you know, find this, like low dose stimulation. It's it's interesting. I'd have to give the audience kind of a a curious thing. I I remember this is probably twenty years ago. I was giving a talk up in Canada, on a radio station and was on hormesis. And the person said, well, since you spent your whole life doing hormesis, took the question that you just asked. What do you do, you know, to enhance, you know, your life, you know, lifestyle and everything else? And I said, oh gosh. I said, I'm, I'm mister I mean, I'm although I'm like Mr. Hormesis in my work, in my life, I'm like anti hormesis. I, I said, I when I work out, I work out too much and too hard. When I work in my job, I never stop working. I said, my hormesis is like this low dose thing and my life is, is like way over the top dosing. And so I, and so I, I said, gosh, I said, I'm, I'm getting a lot of, you know, scientific papers published on hormesis, but it isn't helping my personal life. I said, so, so how can I change this? And so I would have to say, in the last ten years or so, or maybe a bit more than that. I developed a, intermittent fasting, lifestyle, which I've, without getting into all the details, which I've morphed and changed over time. And, and now I, I eat one meal a day. I go twenty three hours without eating and then I, and I, and I eat. And, and so I have a, and at the same time, about four hours before I eat, I will, I will exercise pretty vigorously. And so this afternoon, mid afternoon, I will go and I'll do about an hour fifteen or so minutes in tents on a bicycle. I'll burn probably 800 calories, 900 calories, you know, that that sort of thing. And so there's a, fairly substantial art, you know, for me, that's that's what I do. And and and and and and I have to say that, what I do is I I I take, so exercise to me is the best medicine. Okay? I have to say that exercise, I like it because it affects everything. I think from head to toe, it to me, it's, like, the best medicine. And at the same time, what I what I do is I I take, a wide range of supplements, that I that I, I find it actually, I find eating one meal a day a challenge for me. I always used to have, like, a lot of times, two meals a day. I mean, I had it built into an intermittent fasting. And, I was always, you know, have five vegetables or five fruits. You know, there was a certain you know, I love to have fruits and vegetables and eat a lot of them. And I find that when I eat one meal a day, man, I don't want to feel bloated in my stomach. I want to feel comfortable in my stomach. And I, so I I really can't have, like, five fruits and all these vegetables and and whatever. Because my I'm not that big to begin with, and my stomach can't be that large. Isn't that large to begin with. And and I said, oh, well, how do I maintain this healthy lifestyle with just this this one meal a day, and I don't wanna feel uncomfortable? And so I I said, well, you know, so there are different ways to do this. But but also, I'm I I I actually, ingest probably about 40 or 50 supplements a day. I do a mixture between morning and afternoon. I eat each I'd have to eat each of these supplements before I take them in, before I ingest them, I actually do a lot of, literature search on each one, and to try to find out, you know, a lot of biology, their tissue distribution, where it goes and, you know, how much is crossing my the blood brain barrier, where they all end up going, what their their half life is in the body, and what their effects are. And I actually try to mix and match agents that that I that I wanna take with. Some agents will not pass the blood brain barrier. Some will. Now some agents go to certain organs and others go to other organs. And I try actually, I have a matrix and I try to put those together. And I try to say, well, what actually will seem to work for me? And and and, and so I I actually go through this. And and I and so I balanced it off between giving half lives and everything. You know, what I take in the morning and night, what I take twice a day, and and however I do that. This I mean, this is and then I'd say many of the things that I take, I have now published papers on. And so when I really go into these in great detail, these get obviously translated into into into scientific papers that other people can read. And in all these papers, I would have to tell the audience, the scientific community is is, it's it's never the science is never is never satisfactory. It's intriguing. It's encouraging. You see lots of good effects. You see this and you see a lot of things. And in the end, there's there's insufficient data on almost everything to make a a legitimate, you know, public health decision on this agent versus the next to the next to the next. And yet and and you can't wait for The US or other Food and Drug Administration to tell you what to do because they're never gonna tell you what to do. So you see all these studies that are highly suggestive and they could be good, and you say, Ugh, should I take this or not take this? Who am I going to listen to? And I say to myself, Ed, I said, you know enough to understand these things. You're gonna have to decide what you're gonna take or not, and then make this decision and and and so forth. And so and yet there's a lot of uncertainty in in this because you're always trying to stay on top of this. I'll tell you, a number of years ago, I sent what my listing of, of, of supplements that I take, I sent them to about 20 leading neuroscientists across the world. And I said, this is what I take to preserve my my neurons and whatever else part of my body. And I said, tell me what you do. And, and because we've never really published papers on on what we, what we take. We always, you know, do the traditional scientific papers. Every one of these neuroscientists wrote me back with what they take to preserve their neurons. It was very interesting. And I'd have to tell you that that would be a very interesting paper to publish. I can tell you that. And and and I but I'd have to tell you that each of these very high level people, they were all very different from each other. This was like their own personal decision. This one did x, and someone did y, and someone did something else. And and then I looked at them and I said, well, who's the craziest one of of the 20? And I said, well, look in the mirror and see who the craziest one of it is. It's you. I said, I'm much more aggressive than all of them were. You know, they were all doing something, and they're all a little and I could learn from each you know, we all could learn from each other. You know, that's and and I asked why they were doing certain things and so forth. But, yeah, there's there's a lot of there's there's a lot that that needs to be, discussed on this and and try to because I may be happy someday to to talk with you and the audience about really go over what I take and why I take it. And, you know, because that's that's getting down to where the rubber meets the road, you know, what what, you know, what do you actually do and why do you actually do it? And what's the justification for for, you know, why you're taking this? And and I'd have to say my wife and my two educated sons, they look at me and they say, dad, that's it. You're an n of one. And so we'll see what happens to you before we follow your lifestyle. Right? And so even even in my my own little environment of my own, you might say, family, none of them listen to me. You know, I the only one who listens to me is me. And and and I say to myself, you know, I know a lot more than they think I know. Because I I start I work eighty hours a week on this stuff, and I've been doing that for decades. I know a lot. You know, I think I do. And, but not enough to convince the people that I've lived with to follow what I do. But but yeah. And I said, well, they said, well, how does this make you feel? You take all the I said I said, I don't feel any I wouldn't feel any different if I started. I said, what I'm really trying to do is, I said, I'm trying to slow down protein oxidation. I'm trying to you know, these are subtle things that that that ultimately cripple yourselves. I'm trying to upregulate, you know, processes that process all these damaged organelles and mitochondria and and recycle them or get rid of them or however this is gonna go on. I said, these are things it's not like you wake up and say, oh, wow, I'm loaded with energy. I have no. I said, this is I said, this is the long game. And I said, it's all molecular oxidation. And you're trying to find ways to, to optimize, you know, what what should go on in a cell and how to optimize the clearing out of damaged protein and things of that nature. Don't expect to, to, take a pill one day and say, oh, wow. Because I see these advertisements on television. I take this and I oh, I can walk up the stairs today. And I said, I don't think that's how it works. That's not how it works for me. I said, this is a much deeper biological question. It really deals with, you know, it deals with how how cells deals deals with damage and how it recycles damaged protein and and how you, you know, come up the metabolic works in your cells. And the next thing you know, you know, you have a a more prolonged lifespan that is, better functioning than people that don't follow that. Right. But how do you know if it's too much, or how do you know if you've exceeded the optimal zone of the hormesis? Well, the only that that's a great question. The only way that that I have done it is that I mean, one is subjective. You have to understand yourself and how you and and I did that with the with the exercise or I had to tone it back. The other is is that I I I I do go and I and I and I it's not it's not great, but I but I have, you know, I go in a number of times a year, and I have my I I have certain, you know, blood and urine taken, and I have it looked at for certain types of, changes. And and and so that's telling me if I've gone too far for the most part. And Right. And and so but but most people, I can't imagine almost anybody doing that. And, and, and, and, and, and, and the physicians that you go and talk to, they, they don't, they don't have a clue of what, what, what you're talking about either. You know what I mean? They're very good for a lot of different things, but, but, you know, I I find that this is you have to if you have a physician who understands you and you can educate the physician to then work with you to, to help you, monitor what you want monitored, then then that's see. Yeah. You have to have a cooperating, you know, medical, group that you interact with. And and they see this as and I don't mind paying for extra tests or this and that and so forth, you know, because it's it's it's in my best interest to do that. But yeah, but, but it's, it's, this is not an easy thing to do, because, you know, the studies are imperfect. You have to make judgments. See, in your life, you say, okay, I'm 77 years old. Right? And and let's say I I want to take a new supplement. Well, I mean, how many years do I have left? How much they're gonna make me feel? Let me and and, how do I know that it's gonna work? And and and and and I'd have to say I it's all I do is study. And so I study these things. And so I have some sort of a sense. One thing I don't, you know, have you know, this is interesting that there I take a lot of different substances. Some of them have actin similar same mechanisms. But but I can tell you, if I take when you take a look at a very specific chemical tested showing hormesis, then you can take a mixture of chemicals showing hormesis. Mixtures mixtures, still conform to the same quantitative constraints of hormesis. You might take six hormetic agents, each that show, 30 to 60% optimal. You mix them all together. You are not gonna get anything additive beyond the 30 to 60%. This is what we've we've shown in our work. And and it's so interesting when you when you take a look at extracts from plants versus specific chemicals, you don't get any difference in in the optimal response, from mixture to to an individual chemical. It's really very, very, you know, very, very interesting. Why is that the case? And and, and so I, these are, you know, these are things that we have to work out and and work with at the present time. I it's but, but my my fear of all this is that is that we're so far ahead of the, governments. We're so far ahead of the the medical community. I mean, we are pushing the envelope of, of applications. And and and I think that's quite real. Yeah. What about these, let's say, evolutionarily novel and, let's say, unnatural kinds of stressors, like different chemicals in our environment and microplastics and those kind of things. Like, do those also have any hormetic benefit? Well, I'll have to say that, we have published on on microplastics and they they actually a lot of people have actually and they they do show hormetic effects. If you if you stress a system, if you stress a system, the system responds to that stress by a compensatory process. And and this was actually my my original work with the plants in this growth inhibitor. If if you really looked at the plant growth over time, you initially caused some some limited toxicity. And then what happens is that the plant, you know, see responds by not only repairing the damage, but then it overcompensates modestly, no more than the 30 to 60%. And it's and it's interesting too on, like, the ionizing radiation, which, you know, is a mutagen and and this sort of thing. But ionizing radiation from x rays, things of that nature, it when it hits cells, it's, it can cause damage, but it also causes water to be hydrolyzed. It'll form reactive oxygen species. It creates creates an interesting cellular milieu. But what it does is it ultimately, it it it stimulates the cell to, generate a whole amount of of antioxidant agents. And and in fact, what many people have shown, and that is is that low doses of, relatively low doses of of X rays when, you know, can be used effectively to treat areas of inflammation, to treat arthritis, to treat, all kinds of circumstances. I've seen this in animal studies where they I saw a study out of Germany. It had about six or seven different, different arthritic models, of genetic or dietary or other factors or chemically induced and so forth. And and they treated them all with a wide range dose of of x rays. And these these mice had very swollen paws. I mean, it could be very sore, very swollen. When they treated them with with the x rays, this is so strange, they at the optimal dose of the x-ray, it it just turned on these antioxidant, responses. And the swelling in the paws of these mice just went right down to what it would be in the control group. Then at higher doses, it actually caused, you know, more, oxygen stress, that sort of thing. And so you you have, nature is very interesting. And nature, you know, our our bodies are are amazing in how they have evolved to, to cope with all sorts of stress, within a within a limited within a limited range. And even even the, you know, exposure to to highly toxic agents, things like methylmercury or cadmium or lead or beyond the radiation, you find that they all induce these adaptive mechanisms that the body is trying to, to protect against them. And, I wouldn't, I wouldn't advocate taking any of these things, but, but I, and they're all toxins in their own right. But, but, but, but, nonetheless, the body is, is showing its capacity to, to protect itself. That's, that's what it's really doing. You know, evolution and the study of evolution has taught me that that humans are, and on all life that we see on earth, they are survivors. We are survivors of a long process. And we're the, you might say, the current victory, so to speak. And what that means is that we've been through a lot of, you know, fights over the millennia, developed a capacity to protect ourselves, and our capacity to resist damage is very robust. And we're not we're not sissies or we're not weak, as a species. We're very strong as a species. We have all these capacities to protect ourselves. And, and and and those are and what we're trying to do in this discussion today is is talk about ways in which we can make sure that that we can keep them robust to help us, live a more healthy, lifespan and a longer life within the constraints of, what evolution is imposed on us, which is, I believe, this 30 to 60%, constraint, you know, that, that sort of thing. And, and, and so people are afraid of stresses, but they should not be afraid of stress and reasonable stress, because that will actually, activate, adaptive mechanisms that will make us even more robust. And that that's, that's how I look at it. And that is everything I do in life is to stress myself. Everything I do in life is to stress myself. And, In moderation. Well, yeah. Yeah. And that's right. That's right. And it's it's, and and that's from I didn't meant you meant to ask me other questions. I mean, as a result of literature, I started to do, you know, cold showers and this sort of thing. I do everything, to and not that it's terribly, you know, comforting to take a cold shower at the cold you know, three to five minute cold shower every day at the coldest, amount of water that that comes out of the faucet, but I do that. And and so, I mean, there are but that this is another example of I know that'll induce cold shock proteins and things of this nature and well, you know. And, and I don't know what they're ultimately doing for me. But, but I everything I do is is predicated around, a stress, a low level stress that I think will will be, will will have a a net benefit. Mhmm. A net a net benefit. And so it's and but yet, you know, the that's when we're really, as I said, we're so early in this game. I mean, we know a lot. We know an awful lot, but we're still early in in the application game for humanity. And that's why I think that, you know, a hundred years down the road, two hundred years down the road, I can't imagine this what people will see or do with what with what we know today. Mhmm. And, you know, amazing. With with regard to, like, the mercury and these other, like, plastics and stuff, I guess the dose for the homeotic dose is probably, like, pretty small. So, like, you know, the amount of cadmium or some other heavy metal that would, not cause a negative response is probably, like, super small compared to some other, like, more natural stressor, like, you know, vegetables or coffee or something like that. Well, you know, I I have to say that, each depends on on the organ, you know, on on the agent and the organism. But, on the pollution side, I mean, I'm I'm I would, you know, always be cautious and say, you know, I I want doses as low as possible, you know, because I I'd I'd prefer to take my stress from, from dietary supplements, exercise, and and other lifestyle adjustments. I there there is a possibility that, you know, that, toxic substances, you know, could have a beneficial effect. That's And I know that they do. I've seen enough studies to know that they do. That's not how people should be getting their hormetic dose responses. People should be getting their hormetic dose responses to, via via things that are I mean, but everything we do is toxic. I mean, even these, supplements and and and other things, exercise, everything we do, if it goes beyond the dose is is is, is toxic. But I would have to say that, you know, there are some things that agents that that that are just inherently more toxic and that then and, and and, you know, some of these a lot of the supplements I take, they don't really have nutritional value. They they just have, you know, a value that they, they up regulate various, pathways and within within the body, but they're not they're not far, you know, nutritional functioning. Yeah. You're not taking vitamins. Or Yeah. Well, you know, that that's that sort of thing. Right? And so you have one so it's but nonetheless, I I think that the, regulatory groups and so forth, they they they should really speak about, you know, how do we optimize, a healthy lifespan? How do we optimize, you know, longevity approaches? What's what's what's the strategy for optimization here? And and it really is it really is, stressing people. Stressing them psychologically. I mean, stressing I don't mean, you know, like putting them through, you know, marine boot camp. I mean, that's gotta be too too much, but but, you know, you you wanna make you wanna have, a healthy stress. You wanna have, you know, you wanna you want your your children to be stressed. You don't want them to be coddled. You want them to to, you know, within, within reason, within that optimal zone, you want them to be stressed in all different sorts of ways. You want yourself to be stressed in those different ways. And, and that will optimize your response. You don't want too little, you don't want too much. It takes a lot of wisdom to figure out what, what is and that's also when you, when you have graduate students in school, you're stressing them. You're definitely stressing them. And you have to figure out, you you don't want them to have a nervous breakdown. You don't want yourself to have a nervous breakdown. You you want but you want you want people to be to be, challenged. You might call it stressed. Yeah. But you don't want it to be, you know, to you don't want it to be too little. You don't want it to be too much. You wanna and and and that takes on the on the human interaction side, that takes a lot of wisdom, to know. And then that's what coaches do. I mean, that's what coaches do. They are stressing their their their swimmers or their runners or their their their players. But you you you have to understand the the psychology of a coach is really to optimize performance. And then and you're optimizing performance within that hormetic zone. So and and this is not really much different than than or not any different really than than, you know, what's the optimal length for a cold shower? What's the optimal length for a sauna? How hot? How this and how that? It's all it all has its quantitative parameters all centered around, framing a hormetic dose response. Yeah. It's like the hormesis has, you know, health benefits to you, but, like, resilience is also like a virtue in terms of, let's say, your role as a human being or not another role, but you know, as a part of society. Like if you're more resilient both physically and mentally, then you're like, you know, more reliable as a member of the society and more like functional as well in many ways. So like, yeah, I think many people would need to be or that, you know, a lot of the modern society makes us less resilient or makes us more fragile in many ways. Now, first of all, most people don't exercise and they don't do anything physical. But also mentally, like there's this, I guess, yeah, like everything is kind of, like safe, and everything is very predictable in some ways. And you don't like this mental, let's say, challenge that much, or like you're not required to have, like, a lot of mental resilience, if that makes sense. No. It it fits right into the same framework that we're talking about. Exactly. And and and it's a it's, it's, it's a, it's an all encompassing concept because it, it, it's socio it's from psychology, sociology, all the way down to, to the individual self. And it's all coping with, with, you know, with with, with stress, actually, and try to optimize your response to your environment. Yes. This is it's really very interesting how how it all works, but yes. Well, it's been great talking with you. We could definitely do many hours more of all the details and all the different types of stress. But, yeah, before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and your work? Well, if you're a scientist, you can certainly find me in in PubMed and Web of Science because I publish, a lot and publish, you know, there. But I'm at the University of Massachusetts, and, anybody who wanted to to email me, you can post my email. It's edwardc@umass.edu. I I answer emails quickly, and I'd be happy to talk to people on the phone. And you can post my my telephone number as well. And and and I think that's, and I'd be I'm open to, to talk to people on on Zoom. It's fun to talk and see who you're talking with. And if you're interested in what we have and we have a professional interest, that would be great. So I'm I'm, I like to communicate with people. Mhmm. That's good. And my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or a habit that you wish you had offered sooner? One piece of advice that I would offer? No. That you, wish you had adopted sooner. Oh, one thing that I would well, that's that's that's interesting. Well, I would have to say that, I would I would have to say that I would it it would tie be tied into to intermittent fasting. Wish that I had done that, much earlier. Exercise, I've done from a young age. So I've ever since I was, you know, five years old, I I haven't stopped moving since, you know, exercising since. So I I I think it'd be more more, more on a dietary basis than, than anything else. So I leave it that way. Gotcha. That's good. I've been also doing a lot of or I've been doing intermittent fasting since I was, like, 18 or something. So over ten years. Well, then, that's the way you've got a a good start on it. Wonderful start on it. Thank you so much for, for having me on this and I appreciate it. Yeah and looking forward to your future studies and papers. Thank you very much and there's always something new coming out, Published quite a bit every year. But do you want to achieve and maintain biological youth? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to add healthy years to their life. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@siemlund.com and I'll send you the details.