Me and my wife went to a longevity clinic in India at a five star hotel to go through a week of advanced medical tests, scans and therapies. All of that for only one third of the price you'd get in The US or Europe. In this video, we're going to share our experiences and go through some of our results. If you want to join me at the next retreat, then check out the link in the description. We're gonna start with, how did we get here and, you know, what were our first days here like? Yeah. So we started with, with the, like, very good breakfast, so just recovering from the travels. And I think the second day, we started the the examinations Mhmm. Which included 180 biomarkers, testing all the vitamins, testing organ functions, the most important biomarkers for organs, testing minerals in the blood and liver health. Yeah. Thyroid health, everything. So pretty much, looking at your inner health with, all these, you know, over a 100 different, blood markers. And we can maybe, you know, we got our own reports as well. This is my third time being here. Inka is the second time, and, we can, you know, compare our results of what it was last year when we came and what it's now. Overall, you know, both of our results improved, so we're both happy about that. And, all the, like, relevant biomarkers, improved at least for me. And, yeah, I'm seeing a lot of, like, improvements in just these, important biomarkers. And I can maybe perhaps go through a few of them. We can go through a few of them together. Yeah. So what was it like your these blood sugar markers, like, you know, blood sugar is quite important for oral health. Yeah. So blood sugar improved. So I've been with quite low carb diet recently. My h b a one c, so the average blood sugar within a few months period was 5.2. It reached a good one, but, also, my ketones were elevated, to 0.6, which was a nice finding. And, what was your, like, insulin levels? 3.4. Yeah. That's a good level. And for my own blood sugar markers as well, my hemoglobin a one c was 5%. Fasting blood sugar was 90. I also had a small amount of blood ketones, 0.39, despite meaning, quite a lot of carbohydrates. And my incident was also 2.9, which is another great result. And my c peptide was 1.08, which is a great result. And, moving down the list, liver function. So my liver function was also all green. So all over there were in the, like, optimal ranges. And, yeah, I had no, like, issues with that. What about you? Yeah. So, basically, from the last time, I really wanted to improve my iron levels because last time I got a result, and my iron and my ferritin were low. And now they are both normal. They are very good, so I'm happy about that. Overall, like, there is it it was a lot of improvement from last time because I knew what to focus on. So I really actually tried focusing on the iron and then the blood sugar. Yeah. Much of a thing, and they were improving. Was my goal to improve was my homocysteine levels. So last time there were 12, which is a bit higher than would be optimal, and this time I got it below 10, so nine, which, is a good improvement and, it's a much better result. So I'm happy with that result. And, another thing that improved for me was my lipids. So my cholesterol and ApoB levels were both or they all improved. So my LDL last time was, like, 95. This time it's 76, which is a significant improvement. My HDL is pretty much the same. My triglycerides also the same at 50. And my Apo b, dropped as well to 61, which, is is very good. Last time it was maybe 73, so it's not a huge difference, but still. And lastly, my HSCRP, so inflammation marker, also improved a very small amount. So last time, it was 0.2. This time, it was 0.16. So that's, a little bit lower and, but not, like, a huge, difference. One thing that we both have was our t three thyroid marker was a bit lower, and you've had it pretty much all your life, like a lower thyroid. Yeah. And for me, it's probably because of weight loss. So I've lost quite a lot of weight as well over the last three, three months or so. And, it's not actually just weight, it's, only fat because we need the DEXA scan as well, which we can shift to that, DEXA scan to monitor your body composition. And One of my probably favorite things to monitor over time because to really know what you are getting when you lose weight or gain weight, it's only it only makes sense when you look at the DXA scan because you know if it's fat or muscle that you have either built or lost. Yeah. Yeah. Or or bone bone as well. Yeah. You don't wanna lose, like, muscle and bone mass. You wanna lose fat mass primarily. And this is what actually I achieved pretty much myself that I lost about, four kilos. This is what the test says. I've lost since November, four kilos, and all of it has been fat. So I actually built a little bit of muscle mass. I've gained 0.2 kilograms in my appendicular lean mass. So the muscle mass in the arms and legs. So I've actually gained muscle, you know, 0.2 kilograms while losing four kilograms of fat, pure fat, which is, you know, amazing result. And that this also is reflected by my visceral fat amount, which in November was 350 grams, which is already like a low amount kind of it's not, anything, like, above normal. It's already, like, good and optimal, but this time it was a 54. So I've lost 300 grams of visceral fat. So I've like, yeah, I had a very positive change in my body composition over this, time period and mostly coming from fat loss and directly fat loss and visceral fat loss. What about yours? Well, I have very similar than yours, but smaller changes. So I did lose two kilo kilograms of total body weight, which was mainly body fat, and I did gain some muscle. So I'm quite happy about that. You've also gained, yeah, like, 0.2 kilograms of, muscle in the legs and arms. And, yeah, that's a good good result. And the bone mass did improve as well for you. Right? Or is it The bone bone mass is the same. Okay. For me, my bone mass increased by 0.1%. So, my total lean mass is 77%, my body, and, my bone mass is 4.5%. How did you, like why did you do in between to achieve these results? Yeah. So my diet wasn't that different interestingly. So I was eating, like, a relatively the same diet in November as I am now. I think the biggest thing was just losing weight, and that weight loss was driven a lot by exercise. So I was doing a lot more cardiovascular exercise, and I was worried or thinking that because of I'm doing a lot more cardio and losing weight, I might lose muscle and, like, have a negative result in my body composition change, but apparently it didn't happen. So I apparently did the exercise, even though it was cardiovascular exercise, it still maintained my muscle tissue because I was doing it together with, resistance training at some days. And I was still eating, like, a higher protein intake, which maintains the muscle tissue. So even though I was doing a lot of cardio and losing weight, I didn't lose any muscle and actually built it, which is quite surprising. One additional thing for the visceral fat, what I've noticed is actually, yeah, like green tea apparently can have a very good effect on the visceral fat. So, I've been drinking a lot of green tea for the past few months, and I think that might have a, you know, effect on the visceral fat specifically. So, going from already good amounts to, virtually zero in in that sense. Where can you see the visceral fat? It's here. Right? Mhmm. Yeah. I've also lost About a 100 grams of visceral fat, which is good. You had 250, which is very good. So, like, a good like, a limit for visceral fat is, like, 500 grams. So you you wanna have the visceral fat below 500 grams. That's a good amount. So you were already two hundred and fifty, and now it's a 140 grams. So that's already a positive change as well. So, basically, I had very similar pattern of change. I I actually reduced a lot of heavyweight training. I reduced the weights at the gym, and I started doing with the medium weight sort of longer reps. I'm doing lighter exercises, maybe a little bit longer, a bit more walking, and, actually, a bit more resting Mhmm. Which seems to be very good for my body composition, as well as I ramped up the protein intake by a little bit. Yeah. So that helped. How much more were you eating? I was eating around 60 grams of protein. And In November, last time? Yeah. Last time in the measurement. It might might have been lower lower even on some days. So that that was quite low protein, but I think around 60. And now I'm eating between seventy and one hundred depending on the day. Yeah. Most often, it falls somewhere to 80 grams of protein, eighty, ninety gram. So even with such a slight change to the amount of protein, actually, made a big difference. Yeah. That's good. And, last time we did a lot more comprehensive, like, medical tests as well, like a full body MRI and some scans, liver scans and things like that. But this time, so because we was already we did it last year, so there's no point in doing that, you know, that frequently. We'll wait, like, you know, two more years, three more years to do those tests again. But, yeah, like, the blood test and the DEXA scan and those things will, yeah, like, once a year or twice a year is a good, you know, for us at least, makes sense to do. For the average person, you know, maybe, like, a blood test once a year is a very good frequency to do, and maybe DEXA scan as well once a year if you're over the age of 40 and you're afraid of this age area of muscle loss or, frailty. So, yeah. So at least good to know your setting point for these things because it takes a long time to build bone density and muscle mass. So if you're already finding out in your fifties that you have low muscle mass and low bone density, then you're at a it's kinda much harder to change it or to improve it because you're catching it so late. So it's better to, like, maybe in your thirties to get a baseline to see, I have normal muscle, I have normal bone density, I don't have, like, that much worry right now, I'll check back in ten years or something like that. But, yeah, if you if you catch it too late with even, like, these other blood tests, like, you catch the, for example, diabetes too late, then it's gonna be much harder for you to fix that and change those conditions. That's true. And, also, it's it's easier to make a program that suits your body the best when you have tested different kinds of programs already in your life. Getting these results, changing a little bit of your routine, see how your body changes. You know what's gonna be serving your body and your body composition the best. Yeah. Yeah. And, you know, there's a lot of you know, there's no single way to improve muscle mass or lose visceral fat. There are a few, like, commonalities and principles, but, yeah, you need to find, like, what works, for you. And, if you if you want to know if it has worked or if you if you want to know if your diet is working for you, then you need to measure your blood. And you need to measure your body composition to know, is this objectively working or not? Because subjectively, we are very bad at understanding our health, subjectively speaking. Like, we can't understand what our blood sugar level is just by how I feel or what our cholesterol level is just by how I feel. And, bone density as well. Like, you know, yeah, you might be more prone to breaking bone, but, you you know, everyone does that at some point. So you don't know what your bone density actually is unless you measure it. And the same with, like, visceral fat. You can't see visceral fat unless you have a weak belly, but, but, yeah, like to know what your what your, like, current situation. So, yeah, we didn't do the full body MRI, but it is included. The other people who came with us, the the clients, they did do the full full, program with, all these different tests and scans and, things like EOTMAX, full body MRI, liver scan, ultrasound, echocardiogram, you know, eye tests. You did eye tests too for your eyes. Yes. I was very happy about that too. Yeah. What did it look like or how long did it take? It was perfect vision, and, I just wanted to see if there are any changes and why I get eye strain sometimes. And I got a prescription for eye drops and then, reading classes when I get the eye strain, basically, just for computer use, which is what I have done before as well. So I was just glad to know that there is no degradation in the vision. Yeah. Yeah. The clinic has eye doctor, ear hearing doctor, dentist, physiotherapists. You know, they can help with posture and muscle aches and pains and mobility issues and yeah. There's just so many of these different professionals. Yeah. In regards to the posture analysis, actually, and the training is that last time I found out that I have a little bit of, like, slouched posture. Mhmm. And I've been working on that, and my new new measurement shows that I have grown height. So, basically, that's just my posture has improved, and my spine has decompressed. So one centimeter. Right? Yeah. Yeah. One one to two centimeters, actually. Yeah. That's interesting. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The physiotherapists and the things like they also help to identify certain problems or, like, what is the root cause of a particular problem in your, like, physical pain or physical discomfort, so to say? Yeah. One of the biggest benefits for me have been the cosmetologist and the skin analysis. So they can quantify your skin type with an AI based tool. It looks at all layers of the skin, and it look like, looks at all important markers of the skin. Like, is there dryness in the skin and which area of the skin has dryness? Are there invisible fine lines? In which case, you know that this is the area that I need to work on on my skin. Is there hyperpigmentation? It's not always visible, but there might be something you cannot see, hyperpigmentation. So maybe you need to protect from the sun better. And then based on that analysis, they do skin treatments. So this time, I noticed that my skin had improved a lot. The all the dryness had normalized. All the hyperpigmentation had reversed. Almost all the wrinkles had or the fine lines had reversed. And, it had tightened. And based on also the results, we decided to do a few of, like, treatments. We did some radio frequency. We did, collagen boosting. We did hydropacial to improve the moisture levels. And the skin allows is is good because sometimes the skin texture and the skin type changes based on the skin routines. Yeah. And that will give a good baseline on what kind of products are suitable for your skin condition at the moment. Yeah. I I did the skin analysis as well, and my skin had also improved. I apparently have more drier skin, maybe because of I'm doing the sauna quite often. Mhmm. And, some of the things like hyperpigmentation, and you can't see it with your visible eyes that well, but the the scanner detects it, you know, automatically, and they can see, okay, you have some wrinkles here, fine lines here. You have some acne here. You have some some of this oil oiliness here and, those kind of things that it detects all of that, and you can see what the, you know, the regular eye can see. So, yeah, my skin had improved as well slightly and mostly because of me paying attention to moisturization of the skin a bit more. You know, I never did anything about my skin in the past, and I've just paid a a bit attention to that over the last few months. So it has worked. And then, yeah, they did also, like, some very treatment based on the results. So they did, like, some of the hydration and, yeah, they used some of this skin tightener with this magnet, I guess. It's like a magnet that feels quite weird to have this magnet, you know, drag across your face and it, like, pulls your skin like. But But you see an instant lifting effect. Yeah. And immediately after I came from the treatment, I saw that, yeah, my skin was very, like, soft or supple kind of yeah. It looked, like, really good after that. So, yeah, definitely gonna be doing that, you know, every time I'll come here and, it's kind of kind of cool and, you know, good for your skin health. Another thing worth mentioning is the, food here. So this hotel, the Leila Palace, it has three restaurants, it has a buffet, a Chinese restaurant and an Indian restaurant and their food, they're all just amazing. It's one of the best foods, like, you know, I've ever eaten and, there's a lot of different cuisines, You know, you have seafood, you have Indian food, Chinese food, even, like, regular, you know, breakfast food. So, it's for, like, almost every taste, good desserts as well, like, healthy desserts, with no added sugars and fruits. So, everyone's been loving the food. You know? Yeah. The food is definitely one of the best parts. Yeah. Because everything is modifiable. Everything that you feel like eating is either available or possible to order. Yeah. And, you can And the dinners and the, like, the food moments are also super nice because we gather at the same time Yeah. On most of the day. So you will meet the group, you will exchange ideas about your experience, maybe compare results, and you hear it's almost like a consultation in the in the dinners as well. Yeah. Group discussion about their day and the results of, like, yeah. What does this mean and, what should I do? Or, yeah, it's just a kind of casual discussion about the program, and people, love it as well. The they get a lot of, you know, so much information, which, you know, can sometimes be overwhelming, but, fortunate that there's so many of these, you know, doctors and consultants here as well that just help to interpret all the results and, you know, give actionable steps. Okay. How do you improve this marker or what you need to do to see improvements? So, yeah, it's a very good combo of this, like, theoretical side, but also the just pure practical side in terms of getting the results and then having, like, actionable steps to do to improve those results. And, the staff as well is just very, I guess, generous and, helping and kind. They're always, you know, there to take you to the treatments, take you to the doctors, schedule the appointments, let you know, you know, about some administrative stuff. And, yeah, just very helpful, very fast, and, you know They really make you feel like at home here. It it can be quite new experience coming here, doing all treatments, getting all the results, and the staff are there all the time to support you. And if you if you are lacking something or you need need information or you want to know something or you want to see if a treatment is available, usually, everything is available, then they will take care of it for you. And I like the because, like, everything is it feels easy in that sense. Yeah. Yeah. And everyone who's been here, they say that, you know, they'll come back next year or something that they'll keep coming back once a year. And, that's because of the, like, just having this week where you do all the tests that you need and, get all the consultations that you need and get all the physiotherapy and all the things like that, that you need in one place, in one go, very fast and conveniently. It's just, I guess, something that, you know, these people will, do value because, if you're doing it at your home country, then you might need to wait for a few weeks to get an appointment at your doctor. And and, if you go private, then it's gonna cost a lot more, and you need to do those things in different locations. You need to do the blood test here. You need to do the scans here. You need to do the consultations at other places. So you spend weeks and months going from doctor to doctor to get all this information. Whereas here, you just come here, you fly in, they take you from the airport, take you to the hotel, you start the program, you do the tests every day, you get the consultations immediately, you, meet the other people here, you have a, like, relaxation, you know, vacation essentially in the hotel, in this amazing hotel. And, yeah, just feels like a vacation for for us as well and, for people. I mean, the program is intense. It's like you it is full days of testing and full days of consultations. Mhmm. But it's like the location is relaxing. The food is good, and there there is a spa. There is a sauna, and then there is an opportunity to get massages and reflexology, which I've definitely used the opportunity, for that to kinda wind down every now and then. And Yeah. But it's also, like, exciting. So you're not, like Yeah. Because you're getting all these tests and results, like, you're learning so much new things about your health that it's, like, exciting. Like, you're wow. You know? You know, for us when we got these results, like, we were very happy and excited about it. But even in the first time we came here, there were things that we needed to improve, a few things. But it was, yeah, like, just interesting, and it didn't feel like, you know, you were worn out in that sense. Mhmm. Yeah. So a lot of the things you can't do in certain countries either, or they're gonna be, like, super expensive. So, for example, in our country, Estonia, you can't do a DEXA scan. Maybe you can do a DEXA scan in some other countries like London, like UK or Germany or US. But, again, you might need to go through different locations, and it's gonna be somewhat more difficult. But here, it's yeah. Just come here once a year. We'll come obviously a bit more frequently. But, yeah, just coming here and doing those tests for a much cheaper price is, yeah, just makes a lot of sense at least for people who are, yeah, interested in this. Yeah. And for example, things like intravenous vitamin treatment Yeah. Is not available everywhere. Hyperbaric oxygen is not available air anywhere. Yeah. Like, or everywhere. Neurofeedback is kinda like more advanced, harder to find treatments, and wellness routines. Yeah. Packaged in a, you know, relatively short time period over one week. Yeah. Yeah. There is a lot to choose from. Yeah. And you can adjust the program based on your recommended, like, requirements and, goals. Desires. Yes. So, yeah, definitely, you know, this this was our trip here to Iowa. This time, we'll obviously come back, in a few months. And, yeah, definitely, if you're interested, then check out the the link in the description where you can learn more about it.