The key features is that we learned how this muscle, the soleus, can use about 300% of the energy level that it would be using if you were exercising, on a treadmill. For example, if you were jogging on a treadmill. So it means that this this muscle can use much more energy with this specific movement called the soleus push off than if you were standing or walking or even on a treadmill. Welcome to the Symant Podcast. Our guest today is doctor Mark Hamilton. Doctor Hamilton is a professor of biology and biochemistry at the University of Houston. He's the creator of the exercise called the soleus push up. The soleus is a special type of muscle underneath your calf muscles that Mark and his team discovered to have a unique effect on the metabolism. In a 2022 study by Mark and colleagues, they found that stimulating the soleus muscle with a soleus push up while sitting for several hours was able to lower the blood sugar levels to an all glucose challenge by 52%. The interesting thing about the soleus muscle is that it's infatigable, which means that you can stimulate it for several hours every day without getting tired. It essentially looks like a seated calf raise, but there are some nuances to doing it correctly, which we will all discuss in this episode. Mark is very passionate and scientific about this topic, so he likes to explain this very thoroughly. But I promise to you, if you listen to this until the end, you'll have several epiphany moments when it comes to exercise, walking, and a mighty solace. Doctor Hamilton, welcome to the show. It's nice nice to be here. Thank you for inviting me. Yeah. I'm excited to have you on the show. And, the reason I wanted to invite you was you published this kind of, really exciting and almost like groundbreaking study a few years ago about the soleus muscle and how it has kind of an interesting effect on glucose metabolism and, just overall health. So, yeah, I'm, like, really keen to, like, go into all the details of, of that muscle. So, maybe we can start with you giving, like, a brief overview of, yeah, what did you find in the study, and how did you, like, conduct it? Well, I think that the the main point, first of all, is is not even what we found in this one specific study. I mean, we there's a number of studies that that we conduct that deal with, this this general topic. And I think that the the the first, the big news, was really in in being able to understand that the human soleus muscle has inherent properties that if used the correct way, can have some outsized effects on the body. So, you know, you think about the fact that the soleus weighs about a kilogram or, you know, roughly 1% of the body weight is able to have these outsized effects on the rest of the whole body. And, that was unexpected. And frankly, it wasn't even the initial purpose of our research. And and so I'll be glad to discuss that with you, but it was it it, the the paper that you've read, was was downstream of several other, lines of research that we that my lab had been doing, that where we could test this hypothesis that that soleus contractions by themselves, could could have quite meaningful effects on the body in numerous ways. And and you are right. You pointed out that one of those is improving glucose tolerance. Right. And I as I recall, then, the effect was pretty big, in those people who were training it. That's right. And and so the the particular study you're looking at was was with the immediate benefits of Solis contractions. So so when people think about muscle metabolism, one of the most important principles is something that remarkably is is almost never discussed, And it's not a controversial thing. It's it's it's just a simple fact of nature, which is that muscle metabolism at rest is relatively low, meaning that a kilogram of muscle has an imperceptible effect on your whole body, caloric expenditure or glucose utilization or fat use. And, even the entire body's muscle mass, which is, you know, muscle can be the largest tissue in the body. But because each kilogram of muscle has a very low metabolic rate, its contribution to total body met metabolism is is is somewhat attenuated, by that. So if you think about muscle, think about it like a like a machine, and the machine needs fuel. And when the machine is is not running, it's not working, it's gonna use very little fuel compared to when it's working. And other tissues aren't so much that way. The the brain, for example, is always using a lot of energy even when you're asleep. It's it's it's processed at doing things. The heart's pumping twenty four seven. The the kidneys are always filtering and working. But but skeletal muscle is unique in that humans have voluntary control over the metabolic rate of muscle by what you're doing. And, what we said was that, a fundamental problem currently and when I say currently, I mean, in the last fifty years in humans is that we we sit a lot, and when we sit, our muscles are inactive. And when our muscles are inactive, they're not contributing as much as they could to metabolism. So when I mentioned that there's this immediate, benefit on on health, what we're really saying is how can we sustain muscle metabolism's effects at much better levels than just ordinary sitting when we're when we're resting or could be lying down. And, and even if you exercise and you, you do more than the average person, you still are gonna spend most of your time by far, sitting and active and not out exercising. And so that's what we were, we were interested in, in testing was, was how much does one need to raise metabolic rate of muscle? And if and, we we can put it in units of how many, for example, milligrams per minute does muscle need to burn and of glucose, Or how many milligrams per minute of of lipoprotein derived fat, the stuff that causes heart disease and bad aging? How much do we need to be burning? And and those types of of answers are dependent upon the machinery that's doing the work. And so you can imagine that some types of muscle, have very good machinery for extracting blood glucose and and, breaking down blood lipids that cause heart disease and and stroke and so on. Whereas other muscles are are relatively deficient in that same type of machinery. It depends on what the muscles are are there for, the quality of the muscle. And the soleus is unique, and it's it's a remarkable, fact is that it's unique in all species that it's been studied. So so humans being one type of animal, but then there's there's many other animals that the soleus has been studied in. And in all those animals, the soleus stands out. It's different than other mussels. It's, and we should talk about that. And and everybody like, one of the big take home points should be, what are the distinct features of the soleus? That's point one. And then point two would be, is it always contributing? And the short answer is no. It's it's it's not always using that machinery, like I said before. And and when the Solace is working, it's gonna contribute more. And then the third point is is really the, most important contribution, I guess, that we should talk about, which is which is, is it all types of of muscular activity having equal effects, or is there a specific type of of way of working the soleus? And the short answer to that is is that's that's what we did with the, this specific, type of contraction actually does have a very different metabolic energy demand than, say, walking or bicycling or running, those types of exercises. And this way of intensely targeting the soleus. And even though it's not a a high effort activity because you're not using other muscles, this this muscle, when used this way, doesn't fatigue. And that's unusual. Every other muscle will fatigue. And but when used this way at a high intensity, it it you can sustain the activity. And the the muscle itself, though, is is at a cellular level is working very hard, but you just don't feel it. Sort of like your heart right now is working quite hard. It's doing a lot. But you don't feel it because because the heart has the machinery for for doing that. And, so that's really part of the the science here that we tried to develop. Yeah. That's, super interesting. Like, that's you mentioned that, muscle is kind of inactive most of the time. It doesn't have a lot of energy expenditure at risk, which, yeah, like, you know, there's the saying that having more muscle increases your basal metabolic rate, which is, you know, true to a certain extent. But if you look at the study, then it's not like a massive amount. It's not like hundreds of calories. It's maybe like Very low. Like, yeah, a few dozen or something like that. So, yeah, like, you need to still move the muscle to, kind of burn your energy. And that's it's frankly, you know, like like I said at the outset of our conversation that that that's, that's something that should be widely understood and appreciated. It's it's not a it's that it's a it's one of those kind of facts that can be measured well. And, and it applies to all species. There's nothing unusual about one individual or another person. And, and so so the the numbers are that that the entire body's muscle mass, added together can contribute a meaningful amount, but but but not a dominant amount to your total energy expenditure. And remember, it's it's really not the calorie unit that that we care so much about when we talk about healthy aging. What we really care about are specific substrates. And so we think about, for example, blood glucose a lot. But we also think about the lipoproteins that are in the blood, especially the triglyceride and cholesterol rich lipoproteins that that are in LDL and and VLDL lipoproteins. And, the way we metabolize that glucose or those specific kind of lipids is is gonna have a huge impact on on a host of factors, certainly cardiovascular health, but also, processes that are impacted by inflammation, processes that are important for everything from how your eyes function to to the rest of your body. And and so muscle has a choice. It it can choose between a variety of substrates. And, in fact, muscle can is very adaptable in that way. It can it can select different fuels. But, one important fuel in fact, probably the most important fuel for muscle, that when a muscle's exercising is is this intracellular muscle glycogen. And that, is a carbohydrate that's a it's a big polymer, and it's stored inside of the muscle. And you can think about it like a bunch of glucoses that are stuck together. And that's, by far the predominant carbohydrate that muscle uses when it's when it's exercising, when it's working. And, in in, you know, variety of studies, typically, about 95% of all the carbohydrate that's that's broken down during exercise is coming from this intramuscular glycogen, not from blood glucose. So blood glucose is typically a a a a bit player. It's not a major fuel from working muscle. And and one of the the key features of of soleus contractions when doing the soleus push up, and I must say when doing that, that's more than a minor caveat, meaning that, studies have looked at soleus glycogen use during treadmill walking, for example. And and the the soleus can use a lot of glycogen, like other muscles. But during this activity, there's really a minimal amount, negligible amount of glycogen use. So you can imagine if if normally it's accounting for up to 90% of that carbohydrate use, and now it's not accounting but for about 4%, that opens up the door to the Solius saying, give me another fuel. I can use something else. And, in the case of, an oral glucose tolerance test, we challenge the body with some carbohydrate. Simply, you can adjust, for example, 75 grams of blood of glucose and then look at the glucose excursions in the blood. Now, the soleus is has what we would call metabolic flexibility, and it can turn on those processes for extracting and combusting that glucose in the blood as a fuel. And so that's part of the reason why, we saw these outsized effects because it means that a small amount of tissue can now have a large larger effect than than even a large amount of tissue can have because it has a machinery, and it's using that machinery for for extracting that glucose in that situation. This episode is brought to you by Bone Charge, my favorite company for blue blocking glasses, red light therapy devices, and red light light bulbs. These items are essential for keeping your sleep wake on the cycles aligned in a world that tries to mess them up. Instead of looking at your phone before bed and letting the blue light disrupt your melatonin production, why not wear blue blockers instead that prevent that from happening? Instead of having your bedroom lit up with bright lights, use the more sleep friendly alternative by opting for flicker free red light light bulbs that don't disrupt your sleep. Boncharge also has amazing infrared sauna blankets that can give you the same health benefits as the traditional sauna. You also get the unique benefits of infrared light that improves joint and skin health. Head over to boncharge.com/seamland and use the code seam, s I I m, for a 15% discount. Maybe we can take a step back and talk about what is the soleus or, like, or, like, specific where is it? Like, because people think it's a calf muscle, but it's not really that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, it's it's it's in the lower leg. It's in the backside of the calf. And, and so, you know, humans are are bipedal. We walk on two legs, and most animals walk on four legs. And, so it's in the hindlimb of cats and, rats, for example. And and the it's, the big difference in the human is that our calf muscle is is is, predominantly the soleus muscle. And and in, the quadrupeds, the soleus is a very small little thin muscle. And in humans, the reason maybe we don't talk about it as much or or think about it is is it's it's a deep muscle, meaning that, it's right next to the bone of of your lower leg. And so, there's the gastrocnemius muscle. There's actually two gastrocnemius muscles. One on the lateral head and one's the medial head. And those are those two little, small muscles at the top of your calf. And they're shapely. Right? And, but they're sitting on top of the soleus, and the soleus is underneath it. The soleus is actually a much thicker muscle, broader muscle, and then also, it's a longer muscle, so, three times as long as as the gastrocnemius. So it goes all the way down to the Achilles tendon where the gastrocnemius stops, midway, down your calf. So so the soleus, like I said, is is about, half a kilogram per leg total, about one kilogram. And we quantify that with MRI imaging using standard techniques, and others have done the same. And, but, you know, it's it's it's, it it while it's not a big component of our body weight, you know, as I've said before, maybe 1%, it actually is a is an enormous muscle, com compared to, soleus and other species. If if it hadn't been so big in humans, it probably this this this technique that we use probably wouldn't work. And there's there's other features about the Soleus that we should have said, which is, one, is that it, historically, is is referred to as just what we'd call red oxidative slow twitch type one muscle fibers. All those words are referring to the fact that we can categorize different muscles by their by their, qualities. And those qualities in science are called the phenotype of the muscle. So you can look at the how fast the muscle contracts versus how much endurance it has or how much mitochondria it has for for oxidative metabolism. And there's there's hundreds of variables that that have been looked at, the different muscle fiber types. And the soleus is is is is even special compared to other type one, or slow twitch muscles. And and it's it's distinct in, for example, in anatomical reasons. It its muscle fibers are relatively short, and they they are sort of shaped like a feather and that there's this pennation, the fibers. And meaning that the fibers don't run all the way from the top of the muscle to the bottom of the muscle. And that seems like kind of a minor point when we talk about it on podcast. But it's it's really a major point when you think about real life because it means that the Soleus is is gonna be able to pack in a lot more fibers for a given weight. And so it it's it's it and then you say, well, who cares about that? Well, you care about it when you have to stand and walk. And and you can imagine that when you put your entire body weight on one leg, and then you you have to lift your body weight up, that one muscle is having to to take on an enormous amount of effort to keep you upright and balanced. And you can imagine that you're a quadruped, you've got four legs instead of, you know, one leg at a time to do the job. And so it's a very strong muscle and, like I said, relatively big compared to other muscles in humans. And what we didn't know was was, well, okay. So it's bigger. That's just an anatomical thing. How can we get the most, juice out of it? How can we really get it to work hard? And that was a lot of the science that we did. And it was we started the work in animals, and we we continued it in humans. And we did a whole series of studies and writing papers literally this morning, to yeah. That we've done. And, what I'll just give you the bottom line, and we can get to the details as you ask questions. But the one of the the key features is that we learned how this muscle, the soleus, can use about 300% of the energy level that you would be that it would be using if you were, exercising on a treadmill. For example, if you were jogging on a treadmill. So it means that this this muscle can use much more energy with this specific movement called the soleus push off than if you were standing or walking or even running on trail. Yeah. It's kind of crazy, Elliot. You maintain your entire body weight with even standing on one leg as with this one small muscle kind of And and you never even think about it, do you? You you it doesn't it doesn't wear you out. Imagine if if you were doing another kind of activity, like, let's say, a pushup, you know, where you lay down on your belly and you put your hands down by your chest to push up with your arms. Most people do that for thirty seconds, and they're worn out. And, so so those muscles aren't aren't really well built for high endurance type of activities. But even your your your your thigh muscles, which are quite big and strong, they're good for some things, but but, the the kind of fuels they use in the joints they have aren't quite the same as Soleus. But, again, I don't want anybody to get the the misimpression, and there have been people who have thought otherwise, is that it, you know, it really comes down to the right muscle doing the right activity. And in this case, and and the there's more than one reason. I'll just give you one. It's because it's very easy to understand. It's very easy for everybody to remember, which is that that when you're working a very small amount of your muscle mass like this, the case of the soleus by itself, and you're not working those big thighs and big hips and so on, that means that there's not a competition between these different muscles for oxygen or for fuels. It also means that the heart's not having to to speed up heart rate a lot, in order to deliver all that extra blood to all these tissues. And, some people say, well, so what? That's just basic science. Well, not really. Not in the real world because what it means is that that that when you're working that muscle, in isolation, the soleus at least, it it it's it's not competing for all that oxygen and blood flow, and your heart rate's not getting up high. So you don't feel like you're doing a lot. And it can have a much better, cardiovascular metabolic response by itself than when the rest of the tissues are working. You know, you can imagine, for example, when heart rate gets up really high that that there are some hormonal changes that go on to do that. And that is one of the processes. Just give it as an example. Those some of those hormones that are helping to stimulate heart rate during heavier exercise are also changing the fuels that you use, meaning that it it alters whether you can use, blood glucose or fat, or the intramuscular glycogen. And glycogen use is is sensitive to that. And so that that's just one factor. It's not the only, but it's a it's a easy one to understand that that there's not this big, what we call, homeostatic disturbance of the body, and so that the soleus can can can really, do its do some impressive things when it's working by itself. Gotcha. So, how does the soleus push up then, look like? Yeah. So that we can, yeah, give people some, like, already existing explanation? Yeah. The the the, well, it it it doesn't look like a lot when you look at it. And and and a lot of times, what you see is not always what's happening. Right? Mhmm. And, so if you were to look at what's going on in your ankle, for example, when you're walking, what you would see is that you put your your heel down on the ground, you know, the beginning of a of a step, and that then you your your whole foot is lying relatively flat on the ground. And at that point, the soleus would be working really hard, meaning that the the motor neurons that activate that muscle would be sending, these electrical signals such that the muscle would would be engaged, the soleus. Now, what's really important, and this is actually an interesting story to explain how we developed this baby, was that when you're doing that step with walking, at the end of the step, when your heel starts to rise, that's when your ankle is bending, right? And then then you're actually propelling the body forward. That ankle is is is bending forward. So, you can picture the end of the step as that heel's coming up. And that's that's a it's a very powerful movement, to take, you know, a person that might weigh, eighty kilograms or more and move them forward like that. Well, the the fact is, though, it's a relatively passive process, meaning that big Achilles tendon that we have that connects our heel to our to our soleus and the gastrocnemius. That big Achilles tendon is like a stretchy spring in a way. And that when we're when we're propelling ourselves during walking, that first part of the step, when the soleus is activated and engaged and your your ankle is is not in a that sort of shortening position, It's actually tugging tight on that spring we call the Achilles tendon. And then at that end of the step is when that spring recalls and there's this release of energy. And so you can passively cause the hill to go up in the off the ground and passively push you forward. So the body is built in a beautiful way to conserve energy essentially. That way we can walk with with using less energy than otherwise. And so so the Solis is certainly raising its energy demands somewhat, but but not as much as you think. And that's why I said before that we can actually have a higher energy demand locally by this muscle when you're sitting. And the reason for that is when you're sitting, you're you're now you don't have all this body weight on that stretchy, tendon, the Achilles tendon. Instead, what you're doing is you're sitting and then you teach the research volunteers how to, you're sitting with a knee bent, right, just like normal chair sitting. You've got your foot under your knee, not too far out in front of you, and, then then the the people will contract or activate their their looseness. You're not lifting the whole leg, meaning that you're not using your hip and your thigh at all. You wanna isolate the activity so that all you're doing is bending that ankle forward. And what happens then is the the the heel's coming up, and the top of your foot is starting to press forward. It's a very simple type of of looking motion. But what we learned was that if if you move it at the right range of motion in the in the right velocity of movement, And then when the when the hill gets all the way to the top, you relax the muscle, and it falls back down. And you repeat that in a very dynamic motion. So it's it's a rhythmical type of thing. It's it's not a fluttering like you see some people do. You might notice that that a lot of people sit and they kinda jitter their legs. That's not an intense soleus of activation. This is this is a little bit higher range of motion than that, meaning that the hill's going up higher. But but it's also something we can teach people to do, and and they can get good enough at it after, you know, a couple hours of a lesson that they that they can, be a research participant for some of these studies. And, and and what's interesting to us is we didn't expect this either is that we thought that there would be, a learning curve that would be be based more on, the underlying physiology of people, meaning how healthy they are. And older people might, for example, might not pick up, some exercises as quickly as a younger person because they have physical limitations. You know? For example, if you have a a bad knee or bad back or hips, might have some balance conditions. You you might have orthostatic intolerance. You have other cardiovascular limitations. There are just all kinds of reasons that people have limitations to exercise. And it's not always a complete limitation, but it's enough to hold you back. And, just common sense would say that we wouldn't ask a person who is elderly and maybe has some physical concerns to try to do the same thing as a young 20 year old. And so, like I said, when we began this, I guess we kind of didn't know what to expect. We were maybe thinking that. And what we learned was that wasn't at all the case. And it was really it's it's kinda neat to think that now we have people who are who are elderly can go out and, if they have the discipline, compete with with, their grandchildren if they wanted to in terms of how much muscular activity can you infuse into your lifestyle. So let me, let me put it to you this way, is that, is that if the person doesn't have any physical limitation to doing the soleus pushup, then what it means is that this muscle can be used for a very high local energy demand, where it uses a substrate like blood glucose or these these bad lipoproteins that that cause a lot of problems. It can use those fuels, and it can sustain that activity as long as the person is normally sitting. So we don't tell people to sit more than normal. We say that when you're sitting, this is something you can do. So in the research setting, for example, you might come in and we'd have people sit for a three hour oral glucose tolerance test. And and, you know, that's a time that people might might, watch a couple of movies. Well, when you're doing the soleus push up, now you're spending that same amount of time. You're gonna have to be sitting there anyhow. Right? Instead of sitting at a low metabolic rate where muscle's not doing you as much good, now you can sit and let that soleus muscle do you some good. So you're capitalizing upon something that's already inside of it. And we don't have to to get the train this muscle for months to get it this special. It's it's naturally special. And people already are sitting. So it's it's, you know, and and it's really an interesting thing. Like I said, we have elderly research participants, and we don't exclude for that reason. Many exercise studies will do that. They'll have an age cutoff, and they'll say, wouldn't make sense to compare a 20 year old to an 80 year old? And we say, well, well, in this case, there's no reason to exclude the 80 year old. They they can sit, and their their soleus muscle is preserved well enough to be able to do this. And, you know, again, the ankle joint doesn't have many problems. Partly, it's you can imagine it's built a little bit more bulletproof because we do have to put the entire body weight on it with each step. Knees, obviously, backs, hips, all those shoulders have a lot more problems. The ankles, it it it's it's, preserved a little bit better, and, it's just built differently. And, of course, like I said, that all these other muscles that are working on these other joints are are quite different than some of these. So, elderly are are are good, but but then, also, it's it's important. If you wanna age well, you gotta start when you're young. Right? Then Right. So what we would say is that, this is something that that, even if you're a regular exerciser and and you consider yourself very physically fit, like, you probably exercise a lot. You're probably very fit. And and, but you're still not spending most of your day out exercising. You're you're spending Right. Your time, you know, working at a desk or sitting to to read, watch TV, do whatever you do. And and so this is something that's that you can do during that time too. And and so it's it's what you do when you're not exercising. I mean, you're you're not out doing other things. It's it's not an either or type of proposition. Most exercises, there there is a little bit of competition. You know? If you wanna lift weights hard on Monday, you're probably gonna have to take some time away from doing something else that you'd like to be doing, maybe another type of exercise. But, in the case of the the soleus push up, it's you you have an opportunity to do it every day, and you have an opportunity to do it multiple times a day when you're sitting. Yeah. And that's why we say that we we, we think of it as capitalizing upon something that's already in our bot. Look. If you if you got this machinery and it's gonna do you some good, then then now we have a way of using it. And it's it's up to people get to decide how much they wanna benefit. You know, in the past, with exercise, say, something like walking or running or bicycling, weightlifting, you can reach a point where you do too much. Right? Yeah. You injure yourself, or you can you can have all kinds of of negative consequences. But those things are coming about from processes like we talked about before. One of them the simple one is fatigue. You you run out of muscle glycogen. You're you're fatigued. That's when your legs are heavy. That's when you're tired. And the body's going through all kinds of neural and hormonal responses to keep that muscle working when you're trying to bicycle or run, and that's creating a big stress response. And you you you do too much of that, you're gonna you're gonna harm yourself, on a regular basis. Yeah. But with this, your heart rate's increasing, if anything, five or 10 beats a minute. So you're not you're not hurting yourself there. However, the heart is providing more blood flow. And and the reason for that is that when the heart's beating, there's two reasons, why it can be a more powerful pump. One of those is that it can pump faster, meaning more cardiac contractions per minute. That's heart rate. But then the other is how much blood is pumped with each beat. And and so the word for that is stroke volume. It just simply means that that one stroke or one beat pushes out a certain amount of blood. And the stroke volume is very much influenced by soleus muscle contractions. And the reason for that is, especially in humans, is that where we are, you can think of our bodies as as like a column of fluid where we've got these blood vessels, and there's the gravitational effect of of of on the blood that's in the blood vessels. And just like if you had a a a a tube with with fluid in it, you can imagine that the the the water in the tube is gonna wanna go downhill. It's gonna wanna go toward the bottom. And then that's the exact same thing that happens in our blood vessels is that you can imagine that the blood that's in your veins is going to create more pressure, so that's gonna tend to wanna cause the veins in your your calf muscles, the soleus, to fill up. And so when you do the soleus push up, what happens is that muscle is surrounding these big veins that are down in your lower limb, and it eases that blood and pushes it back up to the to your chest to where your heart is. So, essentially, the soleus is like a heart, functioning, but located in the in the lower limb right above your ankle. And so it's able to pump the blood back uphill. And that's important, for for generating more blood flow through the soleus and through the rest of the body. But it's also important for for draining some of the fluid that tends to accumulate. As we get older, we tend to have a lot more, problems in the in the fluid balance issues. And and, you know, one of them is just that we oftentimes have swollen ankles or swollen feet, especially after a long day of sitting and standing. And so this is a way to drain that. So it's more than glucose reduction. It's more than just lipoproteins. And, there's also these cardiovascular effects, that are more directly impacted, by the solid contractions. So it's we work with some people who are prone to getting blood clots. There's a, you probably heard of d DVT, deep vein thrombosis, and and that tends to happen much more prevalently in the veins and the soleus when people are inactive than in the veins, for example, in their arms or something like this. And Right. And so it's a it's a it's a it's a condition that is in large part, caused by a stagnant blood flow. Blood's not flowing. It can easily clot. And the proof of that, for example, is if anybody ever had their blood drawn, meaning the, phlebotomist, you know, nurse or doctor would draw blood from your arm, and then they put it in a test tube. And if they leave it sitting there for even twenty minutes, that blood won't clot, and it's not flowing. However, it it and that's what happens in the veins in our legs if you're inactive for too long. And blood clotting is a big problem. Obviously, that's what causes stroke and heart attack and so on. And, but when we do these soleus push ups, we're also able to keep the blood flowing through the those soleus veins and, like, literally cannot clot when when you have a very high rate of blood flow, like we're talking about. So it's we work with some people who have those type of conditions. It's not just diabetes prevention. Mhmm. Yeah. So it's not only sitting that's bad, but also, like, you know, being standing in a single position all day that's bad because of the stagnation. So you need to move. Right. That's second half, multiple, I think. It's it's it's, yeah. The the the you know, in large part, for our research, you know, maybe start beginning about thirty years ago, started looking at, what's going on at the molecular level during muscular inactivity? And my lab spent a lot of time studying this, and and we quickly saw, even in one of our very first papers, that not all muscles were responding similar, meaning that that a muscle like the soleus that naturally is geared up for doing great things for you during inactivity, even even short relatively short periods of inactivity, that muscle has large changes in the expression of genes, that determine the quality of the muscle. And we saw that in the soleus more than we saw in other muscles. And and, like I said, it can be pretty rapid. It doesn't take weeks or months. And, and so so when you when you start working the Soles all the time, though, now you can imagine that that the exact opposite is happening, that that muscle is is now, back to where it really wants to be, and helping you. And and we don't, you know, when we started studying this inactivity physiology, what happened, unfortunately, it's kind of an interesting story, is that we what we you know, you you do science in stages. And the first stage that we were studying was in animals, and and we said that when we make their muscles inactive, lots of bad things are happening. And this is really important, and this is a great take home point, is that those bad things that were happening when muscles got inactive weren't necessarily the opposite of what happens when you go on and exercise for an hour. And you can common sense would probably tell you that, but but but there's so much bias out there that exercise is so important for us that it must mop up all of the other problems we have in life. And that's not really the case. I mean, we need to exercise for certain reasons, but it doesn't mean that the stimulus during exercise is able to, for example, keep your muscle metabolism and keep that blood flowing all day long, just like we just Yeah. About earlier. You know, when you stop your exercise valve, the the metabolic rate plummets back to rusty levels. The the, in about thirty seconds, you're you're already half of the way back to your inactive state. Within three minutes, you your muscle metabolism is is about where you started. And so we'd say that that hour that you exercise is great for you for all kinds of reasons, but it's not great for you in terms of keeping muscle metabolism high, and keeping blood flow high. By far more potent ways, just to keep the muscle working. And, and so that sitting that we do is bad. Now, like I said, the the interesting part of all that is that what I just told you, I would I'd venture to say most all of your audience is very logically thinking and says, I understand that. That that's boring. That makes sense. But then when they go and they look at some of the things that are contrary to that, like, for example, go get a standing desk and stand all day. It's like, why would you think that that would be the the the logical solution to sitting all day? They say, well, because you're not you're not you're not sitting anymore. You're standing. Yeah. But you could put somebody, you know, you could hang somebody from their feet from a ceiling too and they're not sitting, but that doesn't make it healthy. It's just different. Right? And when you're using the standing desk and that kind of thing, when we measure metabolic rate, it's almost the exact same as sitting. It's not high. And you say, well, why would it be high? The the the body is very efficient when we're standing, and and it doesn't need to do a lot. And then like you you mentioned correctly was that there's some vascular issues there. So we're not saying don't use a standing desk if you wanna do it periodically as a break from sitting, maybe stretch your legs and, you know, help your back, something like this. Or if you wanna go out and you wanna go on a short walk, that's fine. Go go go on some walks. That that's good. But those brief breaks or that standing is not a very scientifically plausible solution to prolonged sitting. And Yeah. And I don't mean to be disparaging, but it's it's illogical. And the reason is is that that if the problems are are that we have, on average, about ten hours a day of sitting in a young healthy person, more so in a person who has some health concerns, if we're spending ten hours a day, six hundred minutes a day, times seven days a week, times three sixty five days a year, Why do we think that a very small amount, muscle metabolism is is the perfect antidote for that? It just doesn't make sense. And like I said, in our initial animal studies, we saw it very clearly. And and there's there's there's all kinds of of evidence for that now. But it's sometimes hard for people to they think that it's impractical, for example, to be at all day. So then they say, well, then now that's why I wanna do. But but now with the solace push up, we say it is practical to be much more active. You don't have to do solace push ups ten hours. But we see people oftentimes, like I said, including elderly people, who have who have the desire to say, I wanna do everything I can do to age both. I wanna do everything I that's under my control. And if I've got tissue in my body called Solius that is that is functionally working and it can help me, then why would I not wanna take advantage of it? And it does come down to some discipline. And some people would say, I don't have the discipline or the desire. Then, okay, you don't have to do it. But it's but, really, this is not designed for people like that. This is designed for people who Right. I wanna do everything under my control. And, and again, you don't have to take time out of the day. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. That's true. Like, their movement is then the answer to Some kind of movement. Movement. And and the right dosage. You can imagine that that this what we call in science the dose response. Right? So so in in pharmaceutical research, they would say, you just don't take any dosage of a drug, right? You need to take a dosage that's potent. And and and imagine if somebody took a drug and it was very short lived, meaning that it's it's it's pharmacological effect only lasted while you were taking the drug. Okay? Let's say let's say it was only working the hour that it was being absorbed from your from your gut. And then once it was fully absorbed, the body metabolized that drug, got rid of it, meaning very quickly, within minutes, and now the drug had no more effect. So, let's say you had a really bad migraine headache and you could take this drug and it would work for thirty minutes or an hour, but then soon as you, you know, your body finished absorbing it, it no longer was healthy. Then you would say, I want a drug that's gonna be sustaining that effect for many hours over the day. And I don't wanna give half of the dosage. I wanna give the full dosage. I wanna get the full effect. And that's really what we're aiming for here with this research is what can we do to get this full magnitude of benefit of muscle metabolism, especially by a muscle that has the machinery for doing these good things for you? And how can we get that that dosage, not interfering with other processes that that is it's counteractive? And so we don't wanna work as solely as hard, for example, simultaneous to to doing arm push ups or something like this because it's it's it's now gonna you know, you're not gonna do it for very long, and and you're gonna have these other processes counteracting. So that's why we target the soleus. We try to limit the use of other muscles when we're sitting, which is pretty easy to do when you're sitting. And then, and then we sustain it for as many hours a day as as as, the research study or the the real world people choose to do it. Mhmm. Gotcha. So, yeah, how long did the participants do it in the study? I recall it was quite a lot of time. Well And, yeah, how much should should people kind of try to aim for? Sure. Sure. Well, the the first question is how long did they do in the research state? So the we actually had a couple parts to that paper that you're you're you're reading. And and the the first part was was we said, we want to to understand, how much fatigue is there. Now now that was that study was was was exploratory in that sense. We didn't know how much fatigue would be there. And, but we also wanted to take muscle biopsy so we could measure that glycogen that we talked about and and to also look at other molecular processes. And the the remarkable thing, like we said, was people's they when they were doing the solace pushup, we didn't tell them. Remember, this is a first generation study. So so it means that there wasn't any popularity to it. There were no podcasts. There were no, people like yourself who we're talking about. And and so we we we were honest with them. We told them we don't know if this is gonna be healthy or whatever. We just we just wanna know what your experience is here. And then we said we but what we did we were impressed by was that in the initial preliminary studies we did, we were able to to raise the the level of activation of the soleus to very high levels, and we were able to get that energy demand much higher than if they were walking or even running. And so we the lab staff was impressed with that, but but we kind of, you know, waited to to disclose that publicly. And then, when the research participants were doing this, they would be talking to us and acting like they were, you know, this is nothing. Why am I doing this for for so many hours? You know, we do it for in the first group, we actually did it for about, four and a half hours. And we were really more limited by the amount of of time that you can keep somebody in the lab when we could do this testing. And, and then the next study we came back with, we said we said we're gonna do an oral glucose tolerance test, which is where you ingest this glucose drink, and you start in the fastest state, and then you ingest this this glucose bolus. And then you you you typically will take blood samples, and we did about every fifteen minutes for a hundred and eighty minutes, so three hours. And what we did is we were able to to test people while they're either sitting inactive, and we could measure metabolism. Specifically, we're interested in looking at how many grams of glucose the body was burning. And then we would we did it on on different occasions, actually, three different occasions. Once where they're sitting inactive, and then in a random order, we had them do Solis push ups on two different other additional days. And they would also go for a hundred and eighty minutes. But this time, they were they were keeping that Solis working throughout that whole three hour task. And, again, there there wasn't a progressive effort. Like, if I asked somebody, even even a fit person like yourself, if I say, go walk on a treadmill for three hours. You say, walking's nothing to do. Right? Because you're fit. Well, after the first hour, you start to get a little tired. And by the second hour, you say, I'm starting to get a little bit more tired. By the third hour, it's a pretty long walk. Right? When you're doing solace push ups, people didn't feel that. By the third hour, they were usually almost found it easier than the first because they were more kind of in a rhythm of doing it. It's sort of like if you're, maybe sitting in a rocking chair, you know, and you you get the the rhythm of it. You get the rhythm, and then Right. It it you're not thinking about it. It's it's it's that easy. And, of course, we had them instrumented with all kinds of devices that were giving us and the participants this real time feedback to say, are they doing the Solus push up correctly, and are they keeping their metabolic rate at the targeting level? And, unfortunately, you know, there's there's not commercial equipment to do that kind of thing right now. But that, we've we've because of the enormous international interest, you know, we we we get, we got so many emails and and so many people writing about it. Most of the people were were, you know, in the media were just reporting about it in their own way. And then we had this international effect that we didn't anticipate at all, which were there are a lot of physicians who started teaching their patients. And physicians, you know, they're they're busy. They don't have a whole lot of time. They're not gonna contact me for help. And and what they're gonna do is just start doing it. And so to try to be responsive to that, we we really aren't in the business of that kind of, global media communications. And and but we we we did, have some some little, services that we could provide. We created some YouTube videos, for example, or speaking to other people like yourself. And and we could we could try to get that in the right direction. And and, really, it's it's only right about now that that we're we we're we're able to start publishing some of these additional studies, and we're going to be able to hopefully communicate better in a in a mass way. But that's that's a that's a long that's a long, tough ordeal when when you're, you know, it's not my day job. Yeah. The YouTube videos are very good for, like, explaining and seeing it in action. And, you know, I mean, it's it's, like, relatively simple. You pretty much understand it. You're doing, like, this almost like calf push ups, but, yeah, like you're doing, in a slightly different manner. There's all these push ups. Yeah. And and so so practically, if somebody's listening to this and they say, I wanna get started. I wanna do something. What I would recommend is at first, you you you you kinda think through why are you doing it. And it really is important to to understand that this is not a substitute for other kinds of exercise or whatever else you you find valuable and important in your life. This is something that that you you you simply say, I'm gonna take the most unhealthy part of my lifestyle. And I don't think anybody would argue that that all this inactive sitting that people is is doing is doing you any good. I mean, anybody thinks that sitting for hours per day, three sixty five days a year is good for you, is gonna have trouble defending that argument. So so then we would say, you it's something you're already doing. Why not turn that most unhealthy time of your day into something that can be arguably the most healthy time of your day? I mean, think about it this way. If people are hungry to try to get 10,000 steps, and they might already be taking five or six or seven or 8,000 steps from just normal everyday life. We go get 3,000 steps easily in thirty minutes. So they want they're they're trying to add those extra steps, and then they're setting a goal and that they're doing all that. But that's thirty minutes. What we're telling people is, how would you like to add instead of instead of, you know, thirty minutes of 3,000 steps, how would you like to add maybe three hours of of 30,000 steps? You know? And and so what we really are arguing is that you can take the lid off the top of this this limit as to how active can a human being be. So think about that for a while, is that from the standpoint of a researcher, it's pretty exciting. We're saying that, that what would happen to human physiology when we talked about some of it already, what would happen, for example, to human stroke volume? What would happen to the blood flow? What would happen to metabolism of glucose and lipoproteins if human beings could keep their metabolism high the whole waking day? Just that. And then when you go to sleep, you want to turn everything off and and rest. Okay? But what would happen if you could do that? So we say from a scientific standpoint, that's really cool. But then for the average person who's, who's, who's thinking, how much do I need to do? What you should be doing is thinking a little bit like that to say, what could it mean to me personally, if I could keep my metabolic and cardiovascular system humming all day long? Just think about that. I mean, and you say, and I don't have the barriers of lack of time. I don't have the barrier of overstressing my heart or harming a back or a joint. And I can still go out and do the gardening that I like to do. I can still go on walks. I can still actually do all those other things. This doesn't interfere with those things. And so, so it's an interesting way to think about it. So when people ask me questions that are contrary to that, I usually try to encourage them to think through it for themselves rather than preach to them. And, and I say, what's the minimum amount of Solis pushups that I should do? And I would say minimum. Why do you want the minimum? You know, it's just like, well, if, if we're saying I want to age well, well, well, you would say, but do I want to age a little bit better or do I want to age a lot better? You know, why would you advise on how to get a little effect? And it's, and that's really surprising to me. It's it and I I think it's it's probably not that surprising if you really think about a lot of the the the ways that we've thought in the past. Meaning that it's hard to encourage people or, to lose weight and sustain it. It's hard to to encourage people to exercise regularly. And they would say that there's some there's some biological factors there. And we shouldn't stigmatize people, for if they have trouble doing enough exercise and they have trouble sustaining metabolic processes. But in this case, we can take somebody who's obese, and and they they oftentimes are the most motivated. They we can take somebody who's elderly, and they're the most motivated because they say, this is something I can do, and it's and I've got a lot of water. I wanna be much more healthy. And the best analogy I heard from all this, and I'm I'm kind of slow down here. I'm probably running out of time. But a great point was that somebody was asking me about how much do I, should I do this? And, and it, and, you know, you're, I tried to explain it, like I said, a second ago, some physiology. And then finally I said this and it really resonated with him and the rest of the group was, I said, well, if I were to ask you, how much should you should you love somebody throughout the day that that you really care for? If you went to a a loved one, let's say one of your grandchildren, say, should you love them a little bit, or should you give them your whole heart? You know? And say, well, of course, I wouldn't put a limit on it. I wouldn't put a cap on it. I would say I'm gonna give them my whole effort. You know? As much time as I have, of course, I would display that love. And even when I'm not with them, I would want to be. I said, that's sort of the attitude how we should think about healthy aging. If you can do something that will help you a lot, why would you want to put a lid on it and say, I just wanna do it. What's the minimum of that? It makes no sense at all to think that way. It only makes that sense if it's harmful or if or if it's competing with other things that are important. You can't do two important things at once. So like I said, this isn't either our situation. Yeah. You can, yeah, do it in a lot of, places and, it doesn't require extra time. Sure. That's one of the questions is like, have you been doing some of those push ups while the in doing this podcast? Absolutely. Absolutely. I mean, you unfortunately, there's a table here, but the the the, yeah. With with me, I mean, again, I I I have the advantage, of course, of all that. I'm probably one of the most heavily studied human beings on Earth right now. Right? Because I have, for years, been able to to to to look at what's going on inside my body with different types of things. And and I can see it firsthand. But I don't think that that we really need that. I don't think the average viewer needs to kind of get into to hacking and measuring things on themselves too much with something like this. One, there's multiple benefits, but but but two is that that go just simply ask yourself, is sitting and active doing me any good? It's not. Right? That's a very simple question. You don't need to read 50 scientific papers to convince yourself about it. If you want Right. We can give them to you. But that the the, but then you would say, so would it, would the alternative be much more healthy? Would it be better for me? And frankly, imagine if we were talking and I said that we had just developed the first drug that would activate brown adipose tissue, which is a tissue that's heavily studied. You probably have guessed about it. It could activate brown adipose tissue to, to levels that previous drugs haven't been able to do. And it's been able to sustain that metabolic rate for many hours out of the day. People would say, wow. You know, sign me up. I mean, it they would say, give me a drug that would raise my muscle metabolism while I'm just sitting there. They would say that wow. That's fantastic. I don't think a lot of people would be saying, could you, how small could you make that dosage? Could you make it so it turns off within thirty minutes? Could you make it so it's only on for three days per week? You say, no. I wanna take a bigger dose. That sounds fantastic. And that's what we're talking about. Now it's under your voluntary control, and you don't have to worry about, the side effects of some pharmaceutical. This is something that's take taken advantage. We use the expression capitalizing upon the soleus muscle that's already in. Mhmm. Yeah. Well, great. We're gonna put, yeah, like, links to your YouTube channel to the show notes, and I'll actually, like, overlay some of the Okay. Movements as well so people can actually visually visually see it. But, yeah, before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and your work? Okay. So, one thing I would recommend people do is we have a very, simple little website. These are a group of, you know, lab members that put it together. I'd go to our website. It's, I think it's called solacemetabolism.org. And then, like you said, we've got several of these YouTube videos. What what I would highly recommend when you do that, I would recommend people think about it more like a a tool that you would want to reuse. So in other words, there's a lot in this conversation we've just had in the last hour. And there's there's a and what we we try to condense those videos down short, and and we try to provide readings for people that that aren't overwhelming. But I think it's it's quite helpful, and we've seen this, actually in in the real world. When people return to that on a regular basis and continue to reuse it and to think through things, Again, it's it's it's it's, it's important to develop sort of the mindset, that we've been talking about today. What's going on in me? So so so here's here's a great reason to return to those videos and to think through them and to do some reading and so on. Is that every time you sit down, use that sitting in a chair as a cue, as a reminder. Like, you know, you might write a little sticky note sometimes and put it on your bathroom mirror to remind you of something you need to do that day. Yours your little sticky note is the the sitting down. Every time you sit down, think, what's going on inside of me? Remember what I was speaking about today. We talked about glucose metabolism. We talked about lipoproteins. We could have we talked a little bit about the cardiovascular system from the heart, but we also talked about what's going on in the in the blood clotting of the lights. We could go on and on about inflammation. So all of those things can be to some degree improved upon by keeping muscle metabolism high throughout the day. And so then what we would say is, is that that kind of visual cue of I'm sitting down, here's what's going on, here's what I can do, and it's up to me as to how much I want to take care of this. Whether you're young or old, we all wanna be more healthy. We we all oftentimes don't do a lot about that because there's there's some it's not always actionable, meaning that there's not something that we can do. It it's the the sometimes it's the the environment we live in makes it difficult. In this case, the environment we live in is usually one that's filled with reasons to sit and we've, we've put devices on people, for example, that quantify this and remarkably over ninety five percent of all people are sitting over seven hours a day. Mhmm. That means that even if you are you have a job that demands that you're up on your feet, you get home from your work, you're probably gonna be sitting to watch TV or use a computer, you know, do something on your phone, have conversations, have meals. There's a lot of time. And and and so somebody even said, I'm gonna start off with with just I'm gonna set two times out of the day where I know I'm gonna already be sitting, and now I'm gonna try doing the soleus push ups. If you're doing it correctly, it's gonna be very relaxing and so on. You don't have to to kind of go from doing nothing to to to as good as maybe our research subjects did it. You're not instrumental. That's okay. Because what you're doing is you're starting to build, a habit of something. And I always tell people with the first month or two, don't even worry about how fast you move. Don't worry about the intensity. Just think simply about that I'm committed to this, and I'm gonna do it. And then after time, you can go back and look at some of the videos. We'll have more research articles that explain some of the techniques, how you can improve upon the quality. But the first step is is just just focus on making that commitment. And, and over time, when you get really committed, then you can start to increase the quality. And we do that with other things too. I mean, if you are learning a sport, for example, you don't have to go out and race people every day you do it. You're just building the habit of doing it and the enjoyment of it. And it's gratifying when you realize you're doing something good for yourself. And and then over time, you'll get better at it. And, you'll be you'll be a pro before you know it. Right. Yeah. That's, I think, the most, yeah, awesome thing about it. Yeah. That it's so simple and effective. Yeah. And my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you adopted sooner? One piece of advice or a habit? Which one? Just anything, like a idea or kind of recommendation or anything like that. Adopted. What what what you've helped me here? Yeah. What you, you adopted wish you wish you adopted sooner. Okay. The the, well, I mean, well, let's just I'll I'll stick with muscle metabolism here. Okay? I will stay in the theme. That that, I actually and this is I'm gonna make this point humbly because I think there's probably some other people could could could identify with this. Is that I used to be under the mindset that the best exercise I could do would be one that would would use as many muscles as possible. Because after all, we want all of our muscles to be fit. That's number one. And we would say and number two, when a muscle's not working, it's it's not gonna adapt to whatever exercise you're doing. Meaning, if you're if you're only using your legs to bicycle, your arms really aren't used. Your arms aren't gonna adapt to it. So I said, you wanna use a lot of muscles. And so we think about that. That's actually a very true statement. There's nothing wrong with that. But what it did is it it caused me to to miss developing the Soles pushup for for a long period of time. I mean, so I did over twenty years of research, and we weren't even looking to develop the solid pushup. And I wish that I'd been more open minded and said, well, what the large muscle mass exercise can do for me and others is by itself very important, but is there not something else too? You see, just because one thing is true doesn't mean that there can't be something else that's true. And so, so, so I wasn't looking for this and it was under my sort of one of those things that's right under your nose all along. Meaning, we knew the Soleus was special, and and we knew that that if you keep muscle metabolism high all of all the day, that that's gonna be a very distinct different kinds of, physiological happenings than if you're inactive most of the day. But we didn't think, could the solution be just working a small muscle mass by itself? And, and, and with this study that we were talking about, what really opened up the doors to this was, as I thought a little bit more critically. And I said, if you model this and this, this is an important point, and I'm glad that you asked this question. I should have said this earlier. If you model this in the most simple mathematics possible, You say, how many grams per minute does the human body need to burn in terms of glucose or the the the lipoprotein triglycerides in order to have a substantial meaningful effect? How many grams are we talking about? And what, when you do the math, it turns out that the difference between a person with full blown diabetes versus a person who has very healthy blood glucose levels, it's only the difference is only about a 100 milligrams per minute. Okay? So you say most people say, what's a 100 milligrams of glucose? Well, I'll give you a picture of this. You actually have in your entire bloodstream, I mean, all of the blood. If I took all of the blood and extracted all of the glucose, you have about a teaspoon amount of sugar in your blood. It's four grams. Four grams. We weigh up four grams of sugar tonight on your in your kitchen. That's all of the glucose that you have in your blood. K. That's it. And then I said, what's the difference between that that glucose that's in the blood of a healthy fasting level versus a diabetic? It's an additional four grams, meaning that the normal blood glucose concentration is in the threshold for what we'd call fasting glucose would be a little less than a 100 milligrams per deciliter of blood. Okay? You don't have to remember that number. Just remember it's about a 100 something. The diabetic is two hundred of them. So the difference means that the diabetic has twice as much blood glucose in that fasting statement. That's four grams of glucose. Weigh it out on a scale and look at it. And then we said, well, how much glucose is coming from the gut when you when you adjust carbohydrate? How fast is it coming into the system? How much is coming from the liver and so on? And then how fast is it getting out of the blood? And when you do the math, and we we put these numbers in this paper, anybody can read them, it comes down to the fact that the simplest model that you can make would say that a hundred milligrams per minute of extra blood glucose utilization would lower your blood glucose concentration by 50% or about 50 milligrams per deciliter during this postprandial period, meaning after you drink this big sugar print that we've tested. Mhmm. Yeah. The results were almost spot on with that, which means that that, you know, there's this this this old expression, Occam's razor, which is if you're gonna try to explain something, explain it with the simplest explanation first before you get into this highfalutin' kind of way of thinking. And so what we said was we had predicted this and the results were consistent with it. It doesn't take a large amount of muscle metabolism. And then we said, well, how much would muscle would we have to be working to get this hundred milligrams per minute? And the simple answer was not much. If, and this is the huge if, if that muscle wasn't using the other carbohydrate called glycogen that normally muscle burns. And so we said, We already had biopsied people. We already had learned that they don't use glycogen during solace push ups. So that opened the door to a very strong scientific hypothesis, which was, let's test it. And that's what we learned. When we saw the results, I mean, the very first subject, we'd say, I stink. Excuse me. I've got my windows open today. It's a nice cool fall day. That's fine. The, when we tested, the very first person we tested was an elderly lady. She was she was in her mid eighties. She had, she had numerous health problems that I could go into here. And, it was really eyeopening to me. Like I said, the first person we tested was a challenge, a big challenge. And we measured her normal glucose response on one day when she was sitting and active. And then, like I said, we, we measured it a couple more times where she did different levels of Solis pushups. And remarkably her blood glucose was a 100 milligrams per deciliter less. She was just it was pushing. And she was just talking to us. It was just easy to do. And and, you know, you don't wanna bias the subject and show them the results while you're testing them, those kinds of things, but you you you were tempted to. It was a stunning effect. And then we did this in all kinds of other people. And so, again, it taught me to be a little bit more open minded with ideas that are we would sometimes say scientifically sound. Scientifically sound to say use a large muscle mass. Scientifically sound. But but also, I had been missing this. And I, the reason I took a long time to answer this last question of yours was it's remarkable to me how we can almost divide up human thinking. Roughly half of the people who are hearing what I'm talking about today are saying, wow. Why haven't we thought of this before? This is great. I wanna do this. Well, those those kind of people are are perhaps a little bit less biased print. There are the other half though, and again, I don't know if it's 50%, but there's a large percentage of people out there who already have their mind made up about the best exercise is, can fill in the blank. And scientists tend to be the most biased of all. And that's a shame scientists, but they come up with things we call it guidelines, which are human derived, how to be healthy, how to do something. And it's scientifically based. They look at the literature, But if all the literature has been ignoring something like this for years, there's not going to be a big literature. And so, they oftentimes would say, Yeah, but I'm going to wait till I see a whole bunch of other studies supporting it. Okay. You can do that. And, again, I'm admitting that the mistake I made was much like that in the sense of saying, for for a lot of years in my life, I missed out on being able to do something. You know? I I I wish that I'd it didn't take till I was 60 years of age to be able to take advantage. I wish that I've been doing this for for years before. And, and like I said, the the, really, the the the, the possibility was was right there in front of me, but I was thinking one way. Way. Well, yeah. Better better late than never. Yeah. That's right. That's right. And that's a good way to think about it. And it's and and and the good news about that expression that you just said was I shared with you some data where the you can get these very short acting effects. Meaning one doesn't have to like, if I was to say I wanted to, increase my muscle mass, you're not gonna see a change in your muscle mass in the first week. Right? In fact, then you might have to train for for a long period of time to see any effect at all. And you have to be very consistent with it, and and and most people won't see that. So with with something like this, though, that's, working on processes that can happen almost instantaneously. The good news is that that we all can start to turn around some of these health problem, when people choose to do so. Yeah. Yeah. And, I think we'll, hopefully see some kind of, I guess, revolution or transformation in people's lives with doing the solo push ups. So if you see people in, like, cafeteria doing it, then yeah. Yeah. And and and if you had interviewed me, you know, the not that that long ago in the, you know, recent history of several years ago, I would have been uncomfortable doing this kind of interview because I'd say, well, we're let's let science advance. You know, that sort of Mhmm. Thing. But the and and the reason we're talking today, and I'm glad to do so, is that that the the cat's sort of already out of the back, Meaning that that when we published that paper, as I said upfront, we didn't anticipate that there would be this level of international attention. And as as when I say attention, it's probably not the right word. I mean, it was an enthusiastic type of response. And, again, we we were we actually issued a press release, only because the the university I worked for wanted to do something. And and I was sort of hesitant about doing that. And when we did it, look at that closely. It's the University of Houston issued this thing. It's about three minutes long. And you see how I'm trying to tell the public, be cautious here. You know, this is a lab based study. We're not trying to advocate for a change in lifestyle yet. These kinds of things. And then what we saw were literally millions of people who said, you know, I want to I wanna do something good for myself, and it doesn't cost me money. And it's something that I can start doing now, and it's not this either or proposition. So we started to see people really up large uptake internationally. And so so we've decided if that's gonna be happening, I need to at least, you know, make make more effort to try to help steer people in the in the right direction. And and, again, we haven't ended the research. There's still a lot to do. But what we've we've sort of done is sort of we'd call this a natural experiment, meaning it's not one that you, you know, create a hypothesis for and guide. What we've seen though from this, in the last couple of years, we've seen that that that people really do care about their health, especially healthy aging. And they really do have, a lot more willpower and discipline than they've been given credit for. There are a lot of these environmental barriers, and there are a lot of, physical barriers to how much people can exercise. And I don't doubt that. However, with this, what we've seen is those types of people, as I've said before, tend to be the most, impressive. And they they sometimes will will email me and say, hey, doc. You know, I could barely, you know, walk, but guess what? I sit a lot. And, and I, and I'm doing this five, six hours a day and we've done research studies and we have data to back that up. We'll be publishing that. And, and they say, and I'm glad to do it. And, and, you know, and, and so it's, it's, when when something doesn't have a large adverse effect, then then we tend to be a little bit more open as scientists to say, let's go ahead and talk to the public, and and you're not gonna harm yourself here. So, it's it's an opportunity to to really do more. And and that's that's a unexpected, consequence of what we did. And so it's sort of a natural experiment, and how much are people willing and able to do. Yeah. But, yeah. Well, thanks for coming to the show. Really appreciate it, for taking the time. And, yeah, thanks for also publishing the study, which I found really, you know, useful for a lot of people. Well, good. I'm glad for the help. Yeah. And I'll see you around and Okay. Looking forward to the future studies. Okay. Good. Thank you. Have a good day. You too. Goodbye. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Siim. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.