Omega threes are one of those supplements even my grandma knows are healthy for you. Omega threes have been historically thought to protect against heart disease and possibly newer degeneration. However, there's been a lot of skepticism about omega threes and their benefits over the past few years. In this video, I'm going to look at the research about the potential health benefits of omega three supplements from clinical trials. And I'll also cover the controversies regarding oxidized fish oil and if it's going to increase inflammation and atrial fibrillation. So make sure to click a like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. First, let's talk about what are omega threes. Omega threes, specifically EPA and DHA, are vital parts of the cell membrane that regulate inflammation and immunity. You get them primarily from seafood. Omega threes haven't seem to have anti inflammatory effects. They lower cholesterol and other lipids. They also support endothelial function, which improves blood vessel function, and they also improve insulin sensitivity. This is why a lot of doctors have been so keen on omega three supplements for heart disease prevention. There's a long history of omega three supplements and improving outcomes in cardiovascular disease from clinical trials. 02/2021 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that supplementation of EPA and EHA at a dose of zero point four to six grams day was associated with a significant reduction in the risk of cardiovascular disease events and myocardial infarction in a dose dependent manner, meaning that higher doses yielded greater results. Every additional gram per day was linked to an additional nine percent reduction risk of myocardial infarction. That's quite a large amount of studies, including over 200,000 people, which makes it quite compelling. However, that's not all. Another 2020 format analysis of clinical trials found that omega three supplementation improves heart supplementation improves heart function, reduces inflammation, and decreases the risk of cardiovascular disease in patients with heart failure. On top of that, a 2020 meta analysis of 26 randomized controlled trials concluded that omega threes might improve insulin sensitivity and lipid metabolism in type two diabetics. Omega threes have benefits in improving glucose and lipid metabolism, but they also have anti inflammatory effects. Overall, the evidence suggests that omega threes have beneficial effects in cardiovascular disease outcomes, but they also have many other benefits related to inflammation and diabetes. However, even if you don't have any of these conditions and you're relatively healthy, you might still benefit from some omega threes. A 2023 meta analysis found that omega three supplements can increase muscle strength in both old and young individuals. Another 2023 meta analysis of clinical trials found that omega three supplementation even in the absence of exercise was linked to higher skeletal muscle mass and volume among sedentary individuals. A 2020 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that supplementing two grams a day of omega threes for six months increased muscle gain and walking speed among the elderly. That's thought to be because of the anti inflammatory effects of omega threes. Supplementing with omega threes have been seen to reduce pro inflammatory cytokines released by exercise. Usually, anti inflammatory supplements like aspirin or vitamin c after a workout reduce muscle growth. But, apparently, this is not the case with omega threes, and they're actually beneficial for strength. When we're talking about omega three supplements, then we actually have a reliable biomarker that we can also measure to know our omega three status. It's called the omega three index, which looks at the amount of EPA and DHA in your red blood cells. A low omega three index is considered a risk factor for early onset coronary atherosclerosis and cardiovascular death. A sufficient high omega three index, on the other hand, is linked to a lower risk of Alzheimer's, heart disease, and all cause mortality. Even among smokers who have a higher risk of heart disease experience a lower risk if their omega three index is high. So what's the optimal omega three index for longevity? The optimal omega three index for the lowest risk of coronary heart disease mortality is eight to twelve percent with below four percent being linked to higher risk. For all cause mortality, a 2021 meta analysis of 17 prospective studies found that people with an omega three index of over seven point fifty five percent had a fifteen to eighteen percent lower risk of total mortality and a nine to twenty one percent lower risk of heart disease mortality compared to those with an omega three index of below three point five two percent. For Alzheimer's disease, a 2020 study found that an omega three index over six point one percent was linked to a forty nine percent lower risk compared to below three point eight percent. So it looks like the optimal omega three index is around eight percent and possibly even higher. The problem is that with age, you see a decline in your omega three index and the amount of omega threes in your blood. This might be related to dietary habits or the lack of consuming fish, or it could be also related to the inflammation that is increasing with aging called inflammaging that oxidizes those omega threes. But regardless, you would want to have an omega three index of at least eight percent for the lowest risk of heart disease mortality. So how many omega threes should you consume then? I think this is an excellent example of the biomarker being more important than the food. The health benefits of omega threes are mediated by the omega three index, which is also the biomarker that you use to know your omega three status and how much you actually need. Without measuring your omega three index, you have no idea what is your omega three status and how much you would need to increase it. I've seen the omega three index of dozens of people, and they're otherwise healthy, and they eat fish a few times a week, but their omega three index is still six percent. Six percent isn't bad, but it's not the lowest risk category of at least eight percent. That's why I think it's important to actually measure your omega three index to know where you're standing at. To reach 8% with your omega three index, you either have to eat a lot of fish every day, like a 100 to 200 grams of salmon every day, or take at least one point five grams of EPA and DHA combined as a supplement. To reach nine to 10%, you might need to take even more, up to two point five grams of EPA and DHA per day. I don't think that you need to take an omega supplement if your omega three index is already 8%, but it's very unlikely that you will have an omega three index of 8% without taking any supplements at all. There are some people that will have that, but most people won't. That's why the most reliable method of increasing your omega three index is to supplement one point five grams of EPA and DHA per day. Now there are some concerns about omega three supplements that people have, and one of the biggest ones is atrial fibrillation or irregular heartbeat. A large 2024 UK Biobank study on over 415,000 participants without cardiovascular disease found that regular use of fish oil was associated with a thirteen percent increased risk of atrial fibrillation. Interestingly, the individuals who developed atrial fibrillation while taking fish oil still experienced a lower risk of heart disease than those who had atrial fibrillation but weren't taking fish oil. Now this might sound concerning, but it's an observational study. There's also a 2020 randomized controlled trial on over 13,000 patients with high cardiovascular disease risk that found that high dose omega threes, four grams per day, also increased the risk of atrial fibrillation. Now that's quite a large dose of four grams, and it was done on people with preexisting complications. So we don't know if it's going to apply to people without any of these cardiovascular disease risk factors or if you take a smaller dose. Another 2019 clinical trial on over 25,000 participants found that a lower dose of eight hundred and forty milligrams a day of omega threes didn't increase the risk of atrial fibrillation. So it looks like the dose matters. And a high dose omega three supplements up to four grams a day or over three grams a day might increase the risk of atrial fibrillation in people with already existing cardiovascular disease complications, whereas a lower dose below three grams in low risk individuals doesn't appear to increase the risk of atrial fibrillation. Another talking point online is that omega threes are rancid and inflammatory because they've been oxidized. So because of that, consuming omega threes or fish oil will increase inflammation in your body. Omega threes are polyunsaturated fatty acids, and they're quite vulnerable to oxidation. And they can easily get oxidized when they're exposed to heat, sunlight, or oxygen. That's why you should always store your omega threes in the fridge away from sunlight and consume them within a few months. However, the idea that omega threes increase inflammation isn't really backed up by studies. The studies find that EPA and DHA actually reduce inflammation. A 2022 umbrella meta analysis looked at 32 meta analysis, which includes dozens of studies, and they found that supplementation with omega threes can improve inflammatory biomarkers such as CRP, TNF alpha, and IL six. That's a massive amount of studies and is a consistent finding. Now you might think that these studies use some sort of very pristine high quality fish oil, which is why they didn't get increased inflammation. That might be true. But we also have an actual randomized controlled trial from 2012 looking at the effects of daily intake of oxidized fish oil for three to seven weeks, and they found that there were no changes in markers of oxidative stress, lipid peroxidation, deoxidation of lipids, or inflammation. But what they did find was a significant increase in plasma levels of EPA and DHA, which would result in a higher omega three index. That's interesting, and it would counteract the idea that fish oil causes inflammation in your body. In this study, they used highly oxidized fish oil that was oxidized in a way that you wouldn't be able to get from a regular supplement, and they still found that there was no increase in inflammation. Now this was a short term study of only three to seven weeks, but you would still see some inflammation in your biomarkers even within a short time period. It is also possible that there are some inflammatory changes that can be measured, but based on the clinically relevant biomarkers, there was no increase in inflammation even if you use this highly oxidized fish oil. Now you do want to get to the highest quality omega three out there that you can find. A 2018 report by consumerlabs.com found that most of the regular fish oil on the market is rancid, at least to a certain extent. A lot of the fish oils tend to also contain low amounts of EPA and DHA to reduce their cost, and they might be contaminated with heavy metals or other contaminants. If the fish oil is very cheap and smells bad, then it's probably rancid and with low amounts of omega threes. To avoid that, you can use the international fish oil standards website for third party tested commercial omega three supplements. You can check out their omega three concentrations, their contaminants, and their heavy metals. So if you have a certain fish oil brand, you might find it on their website. A low quality fish oil is in the ethyl ester form, which makes it less bioavailable than its triglyceride form, which gets reesterified during manufacturing. That's because ethyl ester omega threes are cheaper to produce. EPA and DHA in their triglyceride form haven't seemed to have an absorption rate of 6857% respectively, whereas it's only 2021% in the ethyl ester form. To know which form your supplement is, you have to read the bottle or the product's website. If they don't expressly state which form the supplement is, then it's probably the lower quality ethyl ester form. You can also check the international fish oil standards breakdown of the supplement. Fish oil and fish based omega threes are the most popular omega three supplements out there, but there are also many non fish based omega three supplements out there that are equally as good. Antarctic krill oil is very high in DHA, EPA, choline, and astaxanthin. A 2022 randomized controlled trial saw that four grams of krill oil reduced triglyceride levels by 33.5% in patients with high triglyceride levels. Krill oil can also counteract neuroinflammation in the brain. So krill oil is a very good alternative to regular fish oil. However, so is algae oil, which has been seen to be a reliable source of EPA and DHA. The fish themselves obtain their omega threes from the microalgae. Algae oil has been seen to increase DHA levels in the vegetarians, vegans, as well as omnivores. Both algae oil capsules and cooked salmon have been seen to raise red blood cell and plasma DHA levels in equivalent values. A 2012 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that DHA from algae oil one point six eight grams per day reduced serum triglycerides and increased LDL and HDL in people without coronary heart disease. So algae oil can be a good vegan alternative to fish oil for getting omega threes, and it's going to raise your blood EPA and DHA levels in equivalent amounts. So technically, there's no need for you to take fish oil if you want to avoid the potential risk of contamination. But algae can also contain some heavy metals, so you would want to use a third party tested supplement. In conclusion, omega threes are quite essential for human health and longevity. There's a lot of evidence from clinical trials and observational studies that a higher intake of omega threes from diet as well as supplementation of omega threes reduces the risk of heart disease specifically. There's also a biomarker you can track that indicates your omega three status called the omega three index, and you wanna get it to at least 8%. To get there, supplementing one point five grams of EPA and DHA per day is needed for most people, but that not might be enough for everyone. It's also worth noting that it takes several months to change your omega three index, and you need to be consistent with it for up to six months to see an increase in your omega three index. If you want to learn more about longevity and ways to reduce the risk of heart disease, then check out my new book, The Longevity Leap, in the description. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is Ceeb. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.