You have enough stem cells for several lives. There was one study in which already exhausted stem cells could be rejuvenated by simply injecting. Alexis, welcome to the show. Thank you. Yeah. We actually had or you joined one of the retreats I had in Iowa that we just where we met. And, there we had some nice conversations about all things longevity, and you have your own clinic in Barcelona. So, yeah, I was figuring, hey, we should have a podcast and talk these things and not just, you know, us talking in privately. So we'll do a podcast about it. So I'm, yeah, happy to have you on the podcast. Thank you very much. Happy to be here. Well, it was a pleasure to share one week with you and all the others and, you know, spend some time with like minded people, people who apply longevity strategies to their own life. And on my end, I could add my little grain of salt into the conversations since my background is medicine. And I started working in the longevity and regenerative medicine field back in 2019. Well, maybe maybe first I should introduce myself. So my name is Alexis Ortega, and I'm a medical doctor in in Spain. And as I was saying, yeah, I started working in longevity back in 2019 after attending, the Undoing Ageing Conference series in Berlin hosted by Aubrey de Grey. And I must say that he was a huge inspiration for me. And I really liked the damage repair framework that he works with. And that was my main driver to decide to become part of it, of this world. And then I finished five master's degrees in five years, one board certification in regenerative medicine by the International Society of Stem Cell Applications. And with this knowledge, I began developing my own strategies, which I, so my my main idea is that they should be able to be implemented with existing technologies and bring them to the public. So this is the idea behind Adastra Clinic, which I founded in 2023, to integrate cutting edge diagnostic and therapeutic tools to rejuvenate the body, extend healthy lifespan, and treat age related diseases, including aging of the skin or external signs of aging. Wow. That's pretty new, like only one year old then. It's only yes. It's only one and a half years old now. I started in January, but it's really promising. Nice. Yeah. I mean, you know, a lot of people are starting to get more interested in this rejuvenation therapies and the longevity. So I guess I guess, you know, you mentioned Aubrey Degree, and he has a pretty grandiose vision of this, He's very ambitious. Let's let's leave it there. Yeah. So I I was yeah. I wanted to ask, like, what do you feel as a practitioner in the field? Like, what is like, what's available right now? Like, you know, let's disregard, like, the costs. So, like, what is actually if you have unlimited budget, what is available for rejuvenation technologies and, like, how how much effect would it have on your, like, longevity right now? Well, first, on the side of measuring, there is a lot of things available. And on the side of, therapies, there isn't as much, but the field is growing at a really fast pace. So we still don't have, much of the tissue engineering therapy side of it. But we do have some, in my opinion, basic stuff that we can combine, integrate, as I said before, and obtain good results. We're always talking, on the basis of supposition. Right? Because we don't have, clinical trials for lifespan in humans. But based on the animal data and based on the in vitro, studies, there's a lot of promising stuff. And I can, share some of the of my clinical feedback. We've obtained really good results in some age related diseases, which is the best way to measure the impact of what we do. So, back to your question, in my clinic's protocol, everything starts with a phase one assessment or measurement, and we have several options depending on budget. But if you had an unlimited budget, as you were saying, I would basically do, first of all, a general checkup. Let's not forget the clinics. This general checkup would include body composition analysis, of course, and all the usual mainstream medicine metrics. Then that would be followed by a series of tests. We would be measuring the NAD levels. We would be measuring at least one epigenetic clock. The immune function, which is a really innovative test based on cell culturing your own cells from your immune system. Your telomeres, your toxic heavy metal load, which is really impactful, especially if you have it, the sequence of your entire genome, probably that would be that would be, really useful, if you had this huge budget we're talking about. This is the most expensive test, but I think it's essential to be able to work on the patient's genetic risks. Otherwise, we're blind in that in that aspect. And then, from there, we would obtain a panel of biological ages. And I insist that's plural because we have one vascular age, we have one metabolic age, we have one epigenetic age. Epigenetic age is the closest thing we can we can have that correlates to life expectancy, but it's not I don't like to call it biological age. So it is the age of your epigenome. Then you would have the age of your chromosomes as well, which would be the telomere length. So from from there, we obtain an idea of how your hallmarks of aging are, if they correlate to your age, if they're older, if they're more advanced, or if they are better than than what's expected for your age and health condition. And then based on that, you get, like, a good, I guess, like, a dashboard or, like, a panel of your health status in that sense. Like, what is your, you know, biomarker? We we get an idea of where we should be working, the most in your health. Say someone someone's epigenetic age is 29 and he's or she's, 35. Well, we do not have to, be too aggressive in rejuvenating the their epigenome because, actually, what it shows is that their current lifestyle is already very good. But, if their vascular age happens to be 57 or 90, for example, in in in one patient I had recently whose age was whose chronological age was, just 59, well, if you have 90 year old blood vessels, then that's the most important thing if you want to extend your life expectancy. Otherwise, any other intervention will probably be meaningless. Right. So, yeah, you you take the approach that you measure things first and then, like, according to the individual's health, you, like, start improving the results. That's right. That's right. And we offer several packages of tests. So in our protocols, depending on the budget, we have a super simplified version, which I like to call the the mini package, in which we only measure those things that are most impactful in your, lifespan. What are those things then? You can go through as well. Well, that would be basically a blood test. Then we obtain the phenotypical age from the blood test. It's your blood's age or your organ's age. That's not to be confused with, the epigenetic age. And we would basically be working on optimizing your blood markers and, your body composition. That'd be mostly mostly it. Then for more advanced, patients or people who want to dig in more, we have, like, a standard package and then a premium package, which would include all the the tests mentioned above. And then we can work on genetic risks. We can The array of things we can do is much larger, much wider. I wanna take a quick break to let you know that you can now get my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. However, to cover the costs of shipping for the preorders, I I decided to also put together a worksheet or a cheat sheet that gives you a two week workout plan, a one week bodyweight workout plan, a two week meal plan, a list of the most effective supplements and their correct doses, as well as the 70 clinically relevant biomarkers discussed in the book and what are their optimal ranges. This entire cheat sheet would normally be worth over $500, but I decided to give it away for only $29. Check out the link in the description or head over to the longevityleap.com to get the longevity leap worksheet. So then goes the phase two. Phase two would be, the first step of the therapy once we've measured everything. Phase two would be the cleanup. So the idea is to remove all the bad stuff in your body before we begin regenerating. That's that's paramount because if we regenerate a sick body, we we can incur in some in potentiating some damage, for example, mutated cells. We don't want to regenerate those. Right? Right. So phase two would be eliminate toxins, eliminate heavy metals, eliminate senescent cells. How do we do that? So we could use intravenous and oral senolytics. Curcumin is a xenomorphic. It's very powerful. It's been used for decades intravenously for cancer patients, for osteoarthritis patients, and it's very well known, it's mechanism of action. Plercetin is also a very good one. And it's authorized in several countries for, ischemic, ischemic, cardiopathies and for chronic heart failure. And it's also a well known analytic. So we use that one. Then we use glutathione. We use intravenous chelating agents to remove the heavy metals. Infrared sauna blankets are very useful too to remove microplastics, but, I'm not sure they they are too impactful on removing heavy metals. I haven't seen great results only with, infrared sauna, but it's a nice addition. It can it can help, remove the, let's say, the easy toxins. And soon we will be adding ozone as well, which works by a paradoxical mechanism. It oxidises you. But that creates a chain reaction of antioxidant release. Right. So it's basically ozone injected into your blood. We you you get your blood drawn. You get the ozone injected into the blood bag, and then you get your blood back back into your bloodstream. What's the state of, the the art or state of the evidence with the some of these therapies that, you know, a lot of Like, for instance for instance, chelation chelation therapy. Yeah. It's not new. It's been it's been used for very long. Although the evidence is mostly observational studies, but there are some good data on its benefits. So we know it works. We know it's safe if if used properly, if you stand to some, monitoring and replacement also of the minerals that it removes. It's important to note that when you're removing mercury from your body or lead, you're also removing selenium. You're also removing iron and zinc. Same thing as when when you drink, green tea, for example. If you drink green tea and you've just eaten a high load of mercury, you'll chelate that mercury from your bloodstream, but you'll also be chelating other minerals and and vitamins. So so I would say the evidence is quite good. What's new is the the combination approach. Hopefully, at some point, I'll be able to publish some data. Right. You mentioned that these senolytics to help to eliminate senescent cells, which are, like, one of the major hallmarks of aging. So, and we talked to her in India as well that there's, like, not a lot of or right now, there's no published clinical trials in synodlytics yet. So what have you seen in your clinical practice with, the Synalytics? I've seen improvements in blood markers. I've seen improvements in SA beta gal, which is a marker of, senescence. So if the senolytic should work, it should reduce SA beta gal, and that's happened with quercetin, not with curcumin. But the idea behind curcumin would be to, block senescent cells, not to destroy them. So it's a different approach. It's a xenomorphic. The the other thing is improvements in blood glucose, improvements in blood fructosamine, which is a marker of glycation. And apart from that, only by the use of senolytics, I've seen some mild increase in NAD levels, which, as I said, I I also measure. So I not only use them because of its proposed effect destroying senescent cells, which as as you mentioned is one of the hallmarks, one of the primary hallmarks of aging. That should be good. Right? Removing senescent cells when they accumulate, not all the time, but regularly on a regular basis, should be good because it would allow the other cells to function, better. But also because of its, anti CD 38 effects, which is, an enzyme that destroys your NAD. So that's the reason behind the loss of NAD as we age. We have an increased expression of CD 38, which is believed to come from senescent cells. And this enzyme destroys a lot of NAD molecules. It consumes it. It's not it doesn't destroy it. It consumes it to work. So the enzyme uses NAD as a cofactor. Then we lose the NAD, and no matter what strategies we apply to replenish it, if we have a lot of CD 38, active CD 38 or a lot of senescent cells releasing CD 38, our energy levels won't be fully restored. So we need we need to address that issue either by inhibiting CD thirty eight, which would be the xenomorphic approach, the curcumin, or the epigenin, for example, which I use I think as well, but only orally. Flavonoids intravenous flavonoids are very interesting because they are they get poorly absorbed, through the mouth, through the intestine. So, so that's something I give a lot of importance to. Either by destroying senescent cells, which, we don't know yet if it works in humans, but probably it does. I don't think those mechanisms differ too much from mice, and we know from my studies that it does. And also by blocking CD 38. So, yeah, I hope that Yeah. That answered your question. Yeah. It did. So you're not only, like, Apigenin, you're taking as a supplement than the other ones that you guys have been doing this. Yes. I give my patients daily Apigenin, Once a month for three days, three to five days, depending on the case, I give them fisetine and quercetine. Right. With the with the IV or orally? Together with the IV, that would be the optimal. Yes. Okay. So, it's not an IV that I do, regularly. It would be just one course of IV therapy together with the oral medication and then followed just by the daily oral epigenome. Gotcha. Right. Yeah. Then then the the phase three of the of the protocol would be the regeneration. Mhmm. And that's when your body is already cleaned. And Oh, so sorry. Sorry. Like, I'll just so, yeah, like, when do you transition from the cleanup phase to the regeneration phase? Like, how long would you or do you, like, get based on the blood markers? If the patient has a high level of mercury, for example, I finish the chelation, which is usually at least five sessions. That may take around a month. And then afterwards, I repeat the measurements. And if the toxin level is, normal or absent, then I start phase three. And in the other cases, it's empirical. So once we finish the the course of IV sessions of, senolytics, glutathione, we start with phase three. Mhmm. Gotcha. Then then in that case, what we do is several things to restore your NAD levels faster than just by using, senolytics and xenomorphics. That would be IV NAD, subcutaneous as well to get a slow release. We do peptide therapy and we do exosomes. And the idea behind that is to put dormant stem cells that your body has mostly in your in your bone marrow and in your fat, back into circulation. So they will be responsible for most of the regeneration process that will that will take place. And hopefully soon, we'll be doing hyperbaric oxygen as well to regenerate telomeres and to, reinforce the the senolytic effect because because that's, the way it regenerates telomeres, probably. I'm just guessing it's not proven, but but probably the the effect regenerating telomeres is not just mimicking exercise, but also removing senescent cells and promoting differentiation, promoting releasing stem cells into circulation. Right. So, yeah, can you walk us through of or explain a little bit, like, the exosomes? So it's I think some people have heard about them. And, yeah, like, what are they and, yeah, how does how do they work? Mhmm. Exosomes. Exosome when we speak about exosomes, we speak about a cellular product, but they're not cells. They're tiny nano sized vesicles produced virtually by any cell. So a cancer cell produces exosomes. That should be made clear. Not all exosomes are good. Okay? Exosomes work as signaling molecules, and they connect information between cells. So they are a cell to cell communicator or messenger. So when in regenerative medicine, we talk about exosomes, we refer to mesenchymal stem cell exosomes mostly, which is a type of, adult stem cell that we have. As adults, we have them in the bone marrow. We have them in the fat tissue. We have them virtually every tissue has some type of stem cell stored in there. But the ones on the lung, on the skin are called parenchymal stem cells, part of the parenchyma of the tissue. And the ones that would get released into the circulation when they need it are called mesenchymal stem cells, and they are mostly dormant. So they don't work until they need it. Then these stem cells have their effects mediated by exosomes that they release. So almost a 100% of what they do is done via exosomes. Stem cells from from the mesenchymal stem cells, can divide into bone. They can divide into heart, nerve, neuron under certain conditions, muscle, cartilage, skin, liver. So lots of things. Then the problem with stem cells is the availability. So we need to remove some some of your fat tissue or we need to puncture your bone to remove some of the bone marrow to get the stem cells. Whereas exosomes can be obtained, for example, from umbilical cord. They're much more easy to work with. We get the exosomes from healthy donors. It's really important that you get them from a certified lab that works with good manufacturing practices, obviously, that's done the due diligence screening for any pathologist, making sure that they are characterized so that we know which microRNAs they contain. That's the that's the other aspect I wanted to mention. So exosomes contain inside a lot of information that that information is stored in form of short chains of genetic material. It's RNase of two types, messenger and micro RNase. Then it also has an exosome. It also has growth factors which stimulate your own dormant and stem cells. So if I inject, exosomes from an umbilical cord or from a from from a from a donor's fat, I will be activating your own stem cells. It's not just the active effect of the exosome, but the stimulating effect that they have locally and in the in the distance. For example, I use exosomes for osteoarthritis. I inject them in the joints. Then they will regenerate cartilage. They work beautifully for pain, for chronic pain. I inject them in the bloodstream. Then they will work. They can cross the the blood brain barrier very, very easily. Since they're so tiny, they can cross it. So they will work, for example, for Parkinson's disease, improving memory. They will work, for any inflammatory autoimmune disease because they have an immunomodulatory effect. Basically, anti inflammatory, antioxidant, and they impair the mechanisms by which you develop autoimmune diseases. So they can improve lupus, they can improve diabetes. It's not that they can cure it, obviously, but they can improve the markers and, make the management better of those diseases. And in terms of aging, if you were really ambitious, to improve your biological age, I'm sure they can provide a really deep effect by reaching virtually every tissue injected through bloodstream or intramuscularly. And they can reduce the the risk of cancer, not just autoimmune diseases, since they seem to have an antitumor effect through certain micro RNAs. And and that's really interesting. That's fascinating because stem cells get released when they detect a cancer. Mesenchymal stem cells, you would think they may help the cancer grow faster. Right? They may help the cancer cells divide, but they don't do that. In some studies, in some published studies in cancer patients, stem cells seem to have a cytotoxic effect on tumor cells via exosomes. So they sabotage the cancer cells. They don't succeed all of the, all of the times, but they help, they help prevent the tumor to grow faster. And in in the exosomes case, they've been studying at the moment as potential drug carriers for chemotherapy agents because they're so good at detecting the cancer cells that they can bring the chemotherapy agent directly into the cancer cell preventing all the undesired side effects on the other cells. Wow. Yeah. That's sort of pretty interesting. So it kind of, yeah, like, I guess regeneration is a you like a semi proper term here that it helps to regenerate some things. Yeah. It does it does other things probably epigenetically as well, But, that's not that's not to take for granted yet, but probably it rejuvenates the epigenome. Mhmm. And it's anti fibrotic as well. It works well for post severe COVID cases, which I treated and it does work very well for aesthetic purposes, which is still, a big chunk of the market. Let's say So I treat a lot of hair loss cases, wrinkles, skin aging, sun damage. It does work repairing sun damage. And, as I, as I was saying, I use them as part of a complex strategy to treat chronic diseases. Mhmm. Parkinson's disease, for example. I use them combined with IV NAD, which has also been published in some, case series that it reduces tremor, it increases attention, and it increases memory. With with the exosomes, like, I guess the exosomes would fall more closer to what Aubrey de Grey is talking about in terms of, like, a future regeneration technology. So but but okay. But it's not still that it's not It's not that sophisticated. Yeah. Probably probably Aubrey Aubrey would engineer those exosomes to contain just one type of microRNA to get an exponentially larger effect on, say, removing fibrotic tissue, removing removing, glycosylation products, for example. So so they're they're very promising tool, just still in the early stages. But Yeah. Again, that doesn't mean we cannot use it. We can use it. I think the the the future of exosomes will, will be, the proteomic analysis so that we can characterise well what they contain and use them, like, laser focused for one target. So the exosomes would mostly, like, improve, I guess, the functional outcomes and age related conditions. So the thing is the the effect of the exosome will depend on the original cell that secreted it and the specific circumstances in which this cell secreted it. Okay. So the mesenchymal stem cell may be subject to different stimuli. For example, an injury. It will secrete exosomes to help the skin injury or the bone injury repair and regenerate. Whereas, if this mesenchymal stem cell is, stimulated by an autoantibody, for example, an autoantibody that's present in lupus, it will produce a different type of exosome. And that's what we don't know yet. We don't know exactly what everything that's inside the exosome does. We have studied the effects, and we know they're, for the most part, good, but we cannot, at least to my knowledge, develop, exorcisms for one single purpose that, that work really well in just that purpose. Right. What would be what what is, like what what what bridge needs to be closed for, I guess, actual, like, life extension? Like, so it's obviously not that sophisticated yet. So what what do you think is, like, missing, or what what needs to happen in the body or like that to happen with, something something like exosome, maybe something else? Let me see. So let me see if I got your question right. Are you saying what do we need to do to make exosomes really impactful in extending longevity, in extending lifespan? Yeah. Yeah. Well, first of all, we need to characterise them well, and we need to understand what every short chain of genetic material and growth factor that they contain is for. Then once we understand that, if not 100%, 90%, then we can engineer exosomes for one specific target, molecular target. Let's say get rid of advanced glycation end products, which they accumulate with age. And that's one of the hallmarks, one of the new hallmarks of aging. I think I seem to recall day 12 now. So glycation, it's a really problematic one because we haven't come up with a strategy to, get rid of glycation once it it accumulates to a certain extent, and it increases the chance of, developing disease. So that would be an option. That would be a a way of using them. Then, in the end, we can also they offer huge potential because we can also also use exosomes to carry a drug that's, for instance, rapamycin or any rapalog that's promoting autophagy in every tissue, for example, the brain, we can bring that drug to the brain and remove all the damage and restore the proper function of each part of the brain and therefore prevent brain degeneration, neurodegeneration. But we're not seeing that yet. It's it's under development. Hopefully within the next ten to fifteen years, we'll start to see some of these into clinical trials. Gotcha. What about peptides then? Those are also like peptides right now. Yeah. They're very popular, yes. Although they're not new at all. I don't know if you're familiar with the with the published literature on peptides, but it mostly comes from 1980s in in The Soviet Union. So it's not a matter of interest for the pharmaceutical companies, although they're very safe and they've proven effective for several indications. I really like peptides and I use them as I told you, I I apply them on the on the phase three of my rejuvenation protocol. For instance, epithalon. Epithalon is epithalamine, the synthetic version of of the hormone of the lesser known hormone produced by the pineal gland, same gland that produces melatonin, but everybody speaks about melatonin and nobody speaks about epithalamine. So epithalon regenerates telomeres. It's an impressive tool. It's a natural natural molecule, doesn't generate any allergy, and it's used, subcutaneously. Once a year, it's a course of five injections, and it does provide several benefits that have been published. It improves metrics of physical performance. There was one study in which in it was it was a population study in 266, participants, I think, which were followed up for six years. And after Epitalon injections, they increased, overall survival by 1.6 to 1.8 fold, which is amazing. Yeah, that was published a long time ago. And as I was telling you, there's not an incentive from from the pharma industry to keep studying them because they're not something that can be patented. They're natural molecules. Only the synthetic ones, such as, the the GLP one's agonists, which are very popular now Right. For obesity and overweight patients like Ozempic Mhmm. Are being developed. They're the ones that are under a patent. But the natural ones are not. And to me, that's that's a mistake. Right. So as I was telling you, Epichalen, some of the some of the benefits, it improves circadian rhythm. It regulates the release of melatonin. It improves fat and glucose metabolism and physical endurance. It protects genes and chromosomes and the treated groups showed less, fewer mutations, and fewer chromosomal aberrations, which is something to take into consideration if we want to live a long time because, random mutations happen all the time. We need to protect our genes. And other other interesting peptides are, for instance, thymosin alpha one or thymolin, which are thymus peptides. They regenerate immunity, your immune system. They help you fight infections, cancer. They've been recently studied for COVID as well. And another group, completely different from from these two, cerebrolysine, cortoxin, the so called nootropic peptides. So peptides that stimulate memory, cognitive function, and that could help in post traumatic injury. So, like, stroke post stroke patients. Gotcha. What about BPC one fifty seven? That's, like, probably the most BPC one fifty seven is is one I don't particularly use, but, I've heard a lot about it. They say it works restoring the intestinal epithelium, which can be really interesting, for leaky gut patients and patients which have malabsorption syndromes. It's something I I'd like to try. Yes. But I don't have experience with with PPC one hundred and fifty seven. Gotcha. And you mentioned that, the the epithalan is, like, five doses per year. So, like, it's, like, how does it look like? Are you doing Five shots. Five shots in in one week or how frequently? It's on alternate days. Okay. So it's, on on a personal ground. It's something I am going to try, but I want to first measure my telomeres and see, first of all, see if I can obtain like more than one benefit from them. So I want to measure my telomeres first and then afterwards use epithalene. If they are not, at least if they don't correspond to what my age should be, and see what happens. Apart from that, I want to use them for the, geno protective effects that I mentioned before. So the their effects protecting genes from mutations. Mhmm. Yeah. That will be interesting. Yeah. You know, for Also also, it's a very interesting approach for restoring melatonin. Instead of supplementing melatonin, we could be using epitalon and see. And then the other test, which I don't regularly do, but it's available, is the melatonin curve in saliva. You measure the melatonin concentration several times during the day and check if your curve has the physiological shape or not, which should be Right. Start to go up after sunset, stay high for two to six hours, and then go down, and then stay very low during the day. And if that's dysregulated, we could use Epitalum to to stimulate it, to regulate it instead of just, exogenous melatonin. Yeah. That's for sure, like, a good idea because, yeah, melatonin goes down with age, and they think be a part of the reason has to do with the deterioration of the And we don't know why. Yeah. That's the other thing. Some people speculate that it's due to lack of regulation by epitalamine. So the the pineal gland becomes calcified. Some authors say that that's because of the inherent, process of melatonin synthesis that as a byproduct creates calcium and destroys the gland. Others say that it's due to inflammaging. So we don't know. But what we know is that the the gland becomes calcified. Also, there's toxics such as fluoride, which if they are present in high levels for a long period of time, will accelerate calcification. But even without fluoride, we will all have calcified pineal gland sooner or later. So let's let's be clear. That's not the cause. That's a contributing factor. Then one one of the one interesting area of of research is, pineal gland, regeneration. Mhmm. I think that they are using some ultrasound now in animal studies to attempt at regenerating the the pineal gland once it's calcified, and it seems to be working. Oh, that's interesting. What would they use to regenerate it? Just ultrasounds. Ultrasounds. Okay. Sort of. I don't know if it if it's shock waves. I don't know if it's if it's painful or not, but it's at least a non invasive technique in which, you wear sort of a probe, helmet probe, which, bombards your pineal gland with the ultrasounds. And probably what it does is just activate the dormant stem cells. So it all comes back to our regenerate regenerative capacity. So Is there is there a, like, so I've heard that, you know, that you only have a certain amount of stem cells and if you, like, activate them too much, then you deplete them and then you won't have them later. Yes. But no. Because you have stem cells you'd have them you have enough stem cells for several lives. So one single stem cell can divide for a really long time if the conditions are good, and that's the key aspect. If you are sick, if you smoke, if you don't sleep well, if you don't exercise, the stem cell will exhaust faster. There was one study in which already exhausted stem cells could be rejuvenated by simply injecting high mega doses of vitamin c into your bloodstream. It was an animal study, but, it's an interesting it's an interesting, area of research. So my take is that even once you're 65, more than 95% of your bone marrow doesn't work. More than 95% has become yellow bone marrow that doesn't have active stem cells. And yet with only just 5%, your body can keep you active and working. And every eight years, it can regenerate your heart. It can regenerate every tissue. So we have multiple backup copies. A lot of backup copies. If we take care of our organism of protecting our stem cells, their lifespan is going to be extremely long. So they generate telomerase. They regenerate their telomeres. And the only dangerous thing that we don't know is what will happen if we keep aging for, say, one hundred and fifty years or older and these stem cells begin accumulating mutations. Probably we would develop some of the most aggressive forms of cancer, and that's something that one day hopefully we'll have to address. Not now. But, the thing is with a healthy organism, stem cells can work very well for a very long time, and they remain healthy and their differentiation capacity will remain active. Yeah. Like, let let's first try to get to 150. And then let's start worrying about what did you do? It should be our main concern now. Not what will happen later. Yeah. But, so I guess the question is, like, you know, we have all these stem cells, so why do we why don't we live to a hundred hundred and fifty? So what do you what do you think? There's many things that hinder their ability that sabotage our bodies before that. Main thing, I would say, atherosclerosis, but also any degenerative disease, neurological or else. For instance, supercentenarians have a form of amyloidosis that is what kills most of them. We don't see that in younger people because we don't have enough time to develop them. But supercentenarians have what they have in common is a specific, array of genetic polymorphisms that protect them from heart disease, cancer, hypertension, diabetes, Alzheimer's. So they don't develop those mostly, or they delay the development for a very long time. Yeah. Then they have a few more decades to develop other age related diseases. And one of them is the the cardiac amyloidosis, which ends up in heart failure and is what ultimately kills most of them. Mhmm. So but I forgot your question. Sorry. It was, why if we have Why do we have Yeah. We don't have all these answers. Yes. Well, I can I can give you a personal example? My grandfather lived to be 99. Okay? He didn't apply any any antiaging strategy. Yeah. So it was purely out of, his lifestyle and his genes, which I hope to have at least inherited in a 25%, 25% load. I don't know. But, well, he lived in a time in which he wasn't surrounded by as many pollutants, as many toxics, and probably he his sleep was better than mine, in his stress levels as well. Anyway, so the thing that he died because of, atherosclerosis, which, ended up in a complication causing massive, brain hemorrhage. Hem so, the the brain hemorrhage killed him because he had been developing atherosclerosis for a very long time. Without so without that factor, if we had been able to completely erase atherosclerosis from his body, he would have lived who knows how longer. But a lot longer since all the other markers were extraordinarily good, were like almost from a teenager. His his cholesterol level was a teenager's. His blood pressure was good. His glucose was good. So and his physical, his physical condition was extraordinary. He was driving a car until he was 96. So and he was carrying wood and he was performing most of the of the home tasks on his own. Probably his body, his stem cells were working very well, regenerating every tissue every now and then. So so the potential is, I will I won't say limitless, but it's much more than what people, even scientists, think. So, yeah, so so, like, the reason we don't live that long is we have the stem cells, but people die to the chronic diseases before that, you know and the same can happen with, like, different types of diseases, like, you know, atherosclerosis or Alzheimer's or cancer. Those there's, like, many of these chronic diseases. That's that's exactly my point. So instead of addressing each chronic disease as a separate entity, we should address the hallmarks of aging. And that's the shift of paradigm. Right. What if, you know, someone has whatever is diabetes or kidney disease or atherosclerosis? So the biggest, I guess, effects on lifespan will come from treating those diseases. If I catch them once they've already developed it Yeah. Well, then their lifespan is already limited Right. By usually around a decade. They lose a decade by already having diabetes, for instance, then we must work first and foremost in optimizing the management of their disease almost to the point of, reaching the markers of a healthy individual as aggressively as possible without taking any risks. Yeah. Once we've achieved that, we can start working on everything else, on what I would be working on if you came to my clinic, for example. Yeah. Yeah. It's like, you know, the it's like in smoking, there's the concept of pack years. So the the more the more years you smoke, the more of, like, the damage you accumulate. And the same with, like, five percent you've been a diabetic for Yeah. The more it will condition you and your lifespan. Yeah. So it doesn't matter what age you get it. Like, you wanna try to treat the the markers of Lavi's or whatever the chronic disease is as as as, I guess, fast and aggressive as as, like, reasonable. Probably, I'd be doing everything at the same time, but paying more attention to the markers of of their disease. And if I can at the same time improve, their vision, their cognitive performance, and their epigenetic age, of course, I will do it. It will probably have, like, retroactive effects Yeah. On their disease. Mhmm. So maybe let's talk a little bit about heart disease and atherosclerosis. You said, yeah, it's probably the, like, role model. My area of expertise, but Yeah. But but I I was gonna ask, like, is is is there any ways, like, regenerative therapies for atherosclerosis or is there a way to also like remove the plaque or something like that? If we enter in the in the terrain of suppositions, I will say that I'm a huge believer in the fact that senolytics probably do clean the arteries of, plaque as well. It's something I'd like to see on a clinical trial, of course. It's something I might consider, study at one point by myself, because it's it it would it would mean a huge change. So at the at the moment, there's very little evidence that anything can remove calcified plaque. We can remove soft plaque from the arteries. Once it's calcified, statins seem to have an anecdotal benefit, really, to a tiny one, but nothing else. So so probably by using hyperbaric oxygen, we'd be able to improve endothelial function and and who knows if reducing plaque. But at least we would, halt the progression of the plaque. If you've already had some with hyperbarics, with, stem cell therapy, I would I should I should, review the literature, which I haven't for some time, on stem cell therapy for atherosclerosis because I am sure there's something there's something published on on that on that topic. For the soft plaque, you would or, like, for the soft plaque removal reduction, I guess, like, lowering the lipids and Just by just by doing cardiovascular exercise, you will reduce it. Lowering blood lipids, cardiovascular exercise, sauna. Gotcha. You can do really simple things to reduce soft plaque. And we measure it, at the carotid bulb the carotid artery by measuring the thickness of the intima media layers of the of the arterial wall. And it's Does that look at the soft plaque or the calcified plaque? The That looks that looks only at the soft plaque. Okay. If there's calcified plaque, you will see it, but it won't provide an estimation of the entire amount of, calcified plaque. Then you'd need you would need a CT scan for that. Okay. So we will have an estimation and a modifying factor on the in the equation of your total ten year heart risk. So if your cholesterol levels and your blood pressure are low, but your intima media thickness is really high, then your your blood, your, sorry, your heart risk is higher than than expected by the by the commonly used metrics. Mhmm. So, yeah, that that's the ultimate risk, the plan. The idea is is yeah. It's it's to have it as as as short as possible, so as as small as possible. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. I guess in the future, maybe there will be some ways to, like, re remove it with some kind of therapies, but, yeah, time will tell. Yeah. That will probably have the biggest, like, effect on the life expectancy because if you, you know, help to reduce, people's heart disease, then you'll a lot of people will live a lot longer. I think there's potential in stem cells, but I'm I'm sure it should it it would have to be engineered stem cells to make them go to the arterial wall and work by removing the the foam cells, the calcium, calcified plaque, and rebuilding the endothelium. Yeah. Yeah. But it's something that I I still don't see don't see coming to the clinic anytime soon. For sure. Okay. So we we talked a lot on the third stage of the process that you mentioned, which is regeneration. We've talked about peptides and exosomes. So is there anything else in this stage that needs to be covered? Well, maybe we can talk about supplements because, my my protocols include a lot of supplements. Mhmm. On my personal strategy, I take 40 plus supplements as as you may remember from from our week in India. We were sharing insights and ideas, and I think, Joe Cohen was the the one who who got the the first the first position by taking one hundred and sixty something supplements a day. I'm not at that level, but I take a lot of supplements, and I give a lot of supplements to my patients. Mhmm. So well, I I could say I could I could give you, like, my top five or my top 10. Yeah. I think so. Longevity. Good. So for longevity purposes, I'm not talking about general health. I really like NAD precursors, no matter which one. It could just be niacin, but, my favorite is nicotinamide mononucleotide, NMN, because it transforms directly into NAD, whereas nicotinamide riboside and R transforms into NMN first. So we skip one one step, just that. Once they get into the cell, they transform into NAD. They I I stack them with, flavonoids, again, Abigenin. If we want to increase NAD, we don't just have to keep pumping more precursors into the body. But to reduce, we need to block the enzymes that destroy NAD as we age. Also with trimethylglycine. I like trimethylglycine also because it has other properties, like it lowers homocysteine. It seems to improve physical performance as well. So I take it nonetheless. But combined with NMN, just to replenish the pool of methyl groups that will, that will empty every time our body eliminates, NMN because it transforms it to nicotinamide by consuming methyl. Then we we have huge amounts of nicotinamide that needs to that need to to be removed from the bloodstream. And then we need to keep pumping the the methyl groups, which are essential for epigenetic homeostasis and other things like healthy arteries. So that was number one. Although, yeah, although I mentioned, three supplements, but it would be like a three in one package. Then I like melatonin. I'm not scared of, megadosing melatonin, although that may not be for everyone. Nothing serious, but it can cause some some, like daytime sleepiness. It can cause very intense dreaming activity, which is uncomfortable for some people. Drowsiness. There's other other side effects. If you metabolize it very fast, it can wake you up in the middle of the night. So in those cases, you need to take the slow release form. I take around five to ten milligrams of melatonin daily. I've given up to fifty milligrams to some patients for shorter periods of time. So that would be number two, melatonin, antitumour effects, neuroprotectant effects, indirect antioxidant. There's no danger of reductive stress by giving melatonin. Whereas if you give too much vitamin C daily, you may shift from too much oxidative stress to too much reductive stress. Then number three would be AKG, alpha ketoglutarate. Alpha ketoglutarate in the arginine form, not the calcium one. I'm not taking any calcium. I'm not supplementing any calcium due to the safety concerns of calcium. So the, the main problem with arginine alpha ketoglutarate is that its half life is very short. So I divide it into two takes, usually one gram a day. Although when I work out, I may take up to five grams And it's proven to be safe. It's a good ergogenic. Arginine promotes the release of nitric oxide, so it will increase the pump of your resistance training workouts. And the alpha ketoglutarate will stabilise your epigenome. And it's been proven to rejuvenate the epigenetic age. So that to me is a reason, a good enough reason to take it. So I said melatonin, NMN, AKG. Number four would be lithium. It works similarly to AKG. It stabilizes the epigenome, but it also protects telomeres. It does not regenerate them, but it will protect them. It will extend the Hayflick limit of healthy cells and it will impact favourably other hallmarks of aging. It will improve mitochondrial function. It will reverse the loss of proteostasis and the epigenetic alterations. So, again, more than more than one reason to take it, although in really small doses, it would be up to five milligrams a day lithium in the form of organic lithium orotate salt, not the one we use in the clinic for psychiatric patients, which is an inorganic form. What else? Then, number four. Number five, probably probably glynaq, which I'm I mean, you're an expert on on glynaq, and I'm sure you can give much more much more insight than I can do, but it's a precursor to glutathione. It's not something I would consider to take since at the moment, since I'm 35. I am taking it because of my last blood test, my gamma GT, my liver enzyme, this particular one was a little high, so I want to bring it down. But once I brought it down, I'll stop it. But I intend to take it and I give it to patients 45 years or older. And and to younger patients, I give glycin just glycine. I don't know what what your opinion on on that would be, whether you agree or not. Yeah. I mean, I think the at least the clinical trials on GLINAC, they're usually done in people like 75 or older. So, yeah, it's hard to say that it's going to have, like, massive benefits in people, like, younger than that. But I think, like, Ruathan typically starts to decline after the age of 45. So that's where I'll start to take the glycine and NAC. Or, you know, I'm taking glycine every day right now, but I'll add NAC daily, you know, after that day probably. But, yeah, like, I think when you're younger, then that purpose of maintaining youthful glutathione levels. Yeah. Yeah. For the antioxidant benefits. So, yeah, and, of course, depends on some other factors as well. But I do take NAC if I've gotten sick or something like that, you know, which doesn't happen often. But but I'd still use NAC on some case occasions. And there's, like, evidence that NAC reduces muscle soreness as well so that can be also useful for the aching. Maybe after some, if you have a digestive intoxication, if you eat some bad food. Yeah, poisoning or yeah, whatever. Exactly, exactly. Yeah and COVID and stuff like that I'll usually take like them. As a as a recovery. Yes. As to as recovery aid. Yeah. Yes. That that that's I I would agree on that. Glycine, you said you you wouldn't be sure whether it would provide any huge benefit to young people or No. I meant I meant the NEC probably, like, because I'm taking glycine already right now. So, like, you know, ten grams a day. How about taking glycine? So megadosing glycine I think to counteract the effects of a high methionine diet because that's my approach, personally. Yeah. I eat I eat a lot of meat. So Yeah. I take around five grams daily. Yeah. I I take also for that reason or one of the reasons I take glycine is for the methionine. So it reduces the effects of methionine on homocysteine and longevity. So I take it also for the collagen benefits and, yeah, even sleep. Oh, yeah. Sleep sleep benefits. Instead of collagen, you take glycine? I take collagen as well. So but, you get only, like, three grams of glycine from collagen, Whereas you might need up to, like 13, I think, or something. Yeah. Twelve, fifteen. So Mhmm. But I think that's, you know, kind of the my take on the glycine requirement. Like, a lot of people take very little. They might take two grams or something like that, but I think, you know So to to promote It's not essential, but I think it's, optimal to get larger amounts. And For collagen for collagen turnover. Yeah. Otherwise, the the body will prioritize, collagen only replenishing the collagen of the organs and will forget about the skin properly. Yeah. Yeah. And, one thing I actually recently discovered so, like, I measured my visceral fat at the Iva Clinic, and it was, like, 54 grams, which is, like, super low. And I think one you know, there's many things I do Is it is it provided in grams or in levels? I forgot. I thought it was It has, it or, like, it has grams as well as this this cubic not cubic, but the square centimeters as well. Yeah. Well Something that's that's confusing in DXA for me is, it doesn't provide information on the organ mass. So probably that's included as fat or as muscle depending on the organ. The heart would probably count as as muscle Yeah. Because it That's lean tissue. But that that's something that I don't like about DEXA. Probably the the only thing I don't like. But, yeah, you were mentioning that that I was saying that the was very low and and you attribute Yeah. Glycine. Glycine, I think, glycine attributes that because a methionine restriction has been seen to reduce visceral fat in animals and humans, and low glycine levels are also linked to higher visceral fat. And I take a lot of glycine, and I also did a video about it. So I'm comparing Brian Johnson and Paul Saladino. So you have Brian Johnson who is on a vegan diet who doesn't get almost any glycine from his diet. His methionine intake is also low, but his glycine levels are also or glycine intake is also quite low. He takes only, like, twelve hundred milligrams. Whereas you have Paul Saladino who eats a lot more methionine. He might get more glycine as well from his diet, from the collagenous tendons and stuff, but his methionine intake is high. So the ratio between the methionine and glycine for him is still kind of He eats a lot of organs. Right? Yeah. Yeah. So he's getting more glycine, but he's also getting a lot of methionine. Whereas me, you know, I'm eating less methionine. I don't eat that much muscle meat, but I supplement a lot of glycine. So I have very low methionine and very high glycine ratio in my diet. So that might, in my eyes at least But you you take a lot of carbs, which would increase visceral fat theoretically. Yeah. But I don't know. Like, it mine was, like, very low. I think, the carbs mostly come from overconsumption of, the carbs. So, like, I'm just When when they accumulate? If I'm losing weight, then I'm not storing the carbs as fat. So, yeah. No. But if you're bulking, for instance, I've been doing a bulk bulk for the past, around twelve months. I began noticing an increase in visceral fat for the past two months. Now I'm cutting it and starting caloric deficit. But, even if it's not an overabundance of carbs, if you follow a high carb diet for a long time, eventually, they will accumulate into into fat, into viscerals, into visceral fat. So so it's interesting that I I did actually decrease it. So, like, I measured it in November. So, ten months ago, my visceral fat was 350 grams. So I've lost 300 grams of visceral fat, although I'm eating, like, the same higher amount of carbs right now. Did you did you change the intensity of your training? I, Would you increase it? I I I increased maybe, like, a little bit hit, but, my I did kinda similar amounts of cardio and weights. So the same routine, only Pretty much. The only the cutting in calories and the adding of glycine? I was taking glycine back then as well, but, I think I was, yeah, it's hard to say exactly what, you know, pinpoints the results. The dose. Yeah. I was more consistent with it. I was taking, like, more I was putting it, like, tablespoons into my shake. Whereas Well, it's it's an it's a it's an easy thing to to study. If you have a bio impotence, scale, you you stop glycine for six months and see what happens, then restart it without changing your gym routine and without changing the the calories, your daily calories or their distribution throughout the day. It's it's interesting, although it would provide data only on on you, but but it's it's something that's really cheap to add for those which have too much visceral fat, stored just in case. So since we were saying glycine has many other benefits, just just for the sake of improving improving your lifestyle, it it can also be like, you you can make a dose it for for patients with, with, abdominal obesity. Yeah. I'm I'm sure it can it can help in many ways, even if it doesn't if it wouldn't reduce visceral fat. Yeah. You know, we've talked a lot about therapeutics and supplements and those kind of things, but I guess your clinic still, like, I guess, guides people with, like, the basics as well, like, diet and exercise. So do you have anything to, like, add about diet and exercise? Are there anything, like, specific that you share with your, clients at the clinic? Sure. Yeah. Well, my advice has been changing over the years. Maybe I can speak about what I don't do recommend anymore, and that would be easier. For instance, I don't recommend intermittent fasting for more than twelve hours. To me, that's suboptimal for muscle homeostasis. And again, I mostly treat older people, 45 years or older. So it's something that becomes more and more important as we age to preserve as much muscle as possible and to rebuild as much as possible. So I won't recommend longer fasting periods unless that person needs to improve blood glucose metabolism or reduce, reduce, lipids, blood lipids. Mostly that would be it. For losing weight, it's suboptimal as well. So it's much better to eat five times a day. It's small meals, high amounts of protein on each meal, low carbs, high healthy fats, and that will that will do that will do the trick much better than than try to restrict them, especially if they're not used to because then they will snack. It makes it it it it makes the it purposeless. It makes it meaning useless. I don't do prolonged episodic fasting anymore personally, but I recommend it to some people. If I don't prescribe rapamycin, I make them fast from between twenty four to seventy two hours a few times a year. For example, a patient I had, he was a very busy businessman, had only a couple occasions, when he had short holidays during the year. I met him, he had to lose weight. He really struggled with that. I made him fast for seventy two hours during his summer holidays for seventy two hours immediately after the Christmas holidays, which in Spain are a big thing and people like to eat a lot and drink a lot. So immediately after I gave him this protocol. He did first one week of fasting mimicking diet followed by seventy two hours of fast. He had never done it before, and he did it beautifully, and he didn't struggle at all. Then he could start to see improvements probably just due to in a small percentage, it was it was a lot of a lot of fat, but it was mostly due to liquid retention and glycogen retention. But he could see a change in the scale, and that created a lot of motivation for him to carry on. And then he started adhering to his diet much better, cooking healthier, eating better, and seeing improvements. And yeah. And regarding exercise, I recommend people to focus on resistance training unless they have a really poor health condition. So if they have never, never, ever trained for the past decade or so, I will suggest them to start with some moderate cardio. And then one day a week of weight training. And then once they've achieved a good level of active lifestyle, I will reduce the cardio to a minimum of one hundred and twenty minutes a week of moderate intensity cardio, three to four days of weight training, which is what I do actually myself. I do four days resistance training where I focus on resistance. So I burn a lot of calories. I don't do much strength. So the approach would be I have to resist the weight. I don't have to push it. I don't have to become strong man, but I need my muscles to work as a metabolically active organ. How do I do that? Present resistance to the weight. So slow, really well executed exercises, moderate weight, not super crazy high, long series of, of reps. Then four days a week, I do that. One day a week, I do cardio. Okay. And the rest of the time, I try to walk everywhere I go. Yeah. That's a that's a good workout routine. Coming back to the the three step plan, so let's say a person goes through that, do they repeat it or what how does it look like after after the third stage? So it will depend on the plan, but, on the premium most comprehensive plan, there's a a follow-up visit that's included after six months where we measure everything again. We measure NAD levels, we measure epigenetic clocks, immune function, and see what's improved and what hasn't. And then if the patient wishes to purchase another plan, we can keep working on that and it will include more therapies. If they wish to keep working on that on their own, which is already an option, I give some I give them some guidelines focused on improving the worst aspects of their health. And then they can keep coming to the clinic for extra follow-up visits, where I revise the supplement protocol. I may order one blood test once a year and, maybe make a few adjustments. But the best option would be to repeat it. Obviously, it can be done once every three years. And once once the situation has changed, once your age has changed, it makes a lot of sense to revisit every marker and adjust things, adjust supplements, adjust your routine. And again, maybe have a different type of peptide therapy, maybe have a different type of regenerative therapy. The the options are huge. So it's it's something, it would fall into the category of precision personalized medicine. There's no plan for everybody. Yeah. For sure. And, again, you know, the the same kind of I like the the idea behind having this three step plan, because you can apply it to, like, you know, outside of the clinic as well for everyday people who are just looking to improve their health. So first, you measure and, you know, get a baseline of, okay, what's my health and what's my status right now? And then you I guess, yeah, the kind of elimination phase or trying to, help to clean the body in in the lack of a better word. And then the the next step would be, like, try to actually rebuild it and support it so you can apply this kind of mindset to the pro or this kind of protocol, this routine. It's like the it's like the phoenix bird. Right. It needs to burn into ashes before reap being reborn younger. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And, yeah, like you said, you don't wanna, you know, start to regenerate the junk material kind of. So, yeah, it makes sense to kind of follow this routine. You don't want to regenerate or to to promote the the growth of cells that produce CD 38, for instance. Yeah. You don't want to fuel them with NAD. Mhmm. Yeah. That's correct. That's so that's my approach. And, also, the trying to get the best of both worlds from anabolic and catabolic phases. So promoting growth is good so long as it does not happen 100% of the time. And restricting calories and promoting autophagy and recycling, recycling the bad stuff that accumulates in the body into good stuff cannot be a lifestyle because it will end up harming you, causing harm. So in my opinion, it should be 80% growth, 20% autophagy, and re rebuilding the body. That can be applied on a yearly basis. For for instance, you can do eight to ten months of bulk followed by two to four months of caloric deficit. Or you could do it weekly. For, for example, what I do is train for four days strength. And during these four days, I eat a lot of protein. I eat a lot of calories. I don't really count them. I may I may have to start cutting carbs, in light of my last blood test, which I will certainly start doing now. But, the thing is you want to promote muscle homeostasis. You need high input of protein and you need to keep your antioxidant levels low. Keep at least the exogenous ones. You can take melatonin because it will enter a funnel and only the amount of antioxidants that you need will be released. It won't megadose you antioxidants, but you shouldn't be taking other antioxidants such as broccoli extract, vitamin C, astaxanthin, whatever. And the other 20% of the time you want high antioxidants, you want rapamycin or spermidine or fasting or caloric deficit in any form. And then you won't be under too much stress. You won't be losing muscle by just doing it for two to three days. And you'll soon switch back into the growth phase. So you get the idea. That's, like, to me, that's the getting the best of both worlds. Yeah. Cycling between them. But, yeah, I mean, it's been great talking with you for and, yeah, we could talk many hours on these different therapies, but I think it's been a very, yeah, it's been a very good, overview about this and the the three step I think we've touched upon so many topics that we should, like, like, decide on one single topic for our next meeting. Yeah. For sure. And expand on that. Yeah. It's a great introduction. But, yeah, where can people find you and your work? Sorry. Once again? Where can people find you and your work? Yes. Well, I can be find on on Instagram. It's my profile is Alexis low hyphen Ortega low hyphen MD medical doctor. And I can be found in Barcelona, Spain most of the year. I work there. I am the medical director of the clinic. So you can find me there. You've got my my website is, adastra clinic a d from Denmark, astroclinic.com. And you can find all the information there, all my contact details, everything, as well as in my Instagram profile. Sounds good. It's been great to talk with you. My last question is, what's this one piece of advice or a habit that you wish you would have done sooner? I wish I had sooner start measuring things. Mhmm. Yeah. So probably I started when I was 30, 31. I should have started before because I could have addressed some things earlier. I could have learned a lot about myself. And I'm not talking about sophisticated stuff, just blood tests, just a routine blood test. Anyone between 20 to 30 years old should do it at least once a year. You'll get to know yourself better. You'll get to know if your lifestyle is doing you good or bad, and you will start to become interested in your health, and hopefully that interest will last for the rest of your life. Yeah. I think that's one massive takeaway I think everyone should, take. But, yeah, thanks for coming to the podcast and sharing your knowledge. My pleasure. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Sim. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.