Novos Core is a supplement powder with 12 ingredients that's supposed to target all the hallmarks of aging. Novos has been featured in Forbes, The Wall Street Journal, and it gained more attention after a lot of people in the rejuvenation Olympics were taking it. But I would still think you would want to know if it has any evidence and if it actually works. So in this video, I'm going to do an unsponsored, unbiased review of Novos core. I'm going to go through the specific studies on Novos and all of the ingredients. It's gonna be a slightly longer video, so all the ingredients are listed in the description box below so you can choose which time point you want to look at. Alright. Let's begin with the ingredients, which are a hundred milligrams of vitamin c, three hundred four milligrams of magnesium, two thousand milligrams of glycine, eleven hundred milligrams of calcium alpha ketoglutarate, one thousand milligrams of glucosamine sulfate, three hundred milligrams of rhodiola rosea, a hundred and fifty milligrams of theanine, a hundred milligrams of hyaluronic acid, a hundred milligrams of fisetin, a hundred milligrams of organic ginger root, fifty milligrams of pterostilbene, and twenty milligrams of lithium aspartate providing one milligram of lithium. The idea is that the synergy of these ingredients is greater than each individual ingredient alone. I think it's a pretty interesting idea and who knows it could be true. Basically, it would mean that it's formulated in a specific way with different ratios that is better than megadosing each individual ingredient. Now I'm gonna go through the individual ingredients of Novos, but first let's take a look at the studies with Novos itself with all the ingredients combined. First, we have a preprint mouse study that show that giving Novos daily extended median lifespan to a twenty percent over controls. Novos achieved the same effect as a high efficacy senolytic intervention consisting of a low dose of Navitoclax combined with the mitochondrial uncoupler BAM fifteen. Both of the interventions were started at an old age, 20. And the mice who got either Novos or the senolybic lived 20% longer than those getting nothing. Now this is currently still a preprint which means that it hasn't been peer reviewed by other scientists. But if the findings are true, then it is quite interesting. And I would definitely be interested in seeing future trials on animals with Novos and see if it has similar effects. In humans, it's going to be obviously impossible to do, but Novos has done a case study on 12 participants measuring their epigenetic speed of aging with the Dunedin Paste test. This is the same test Brian Johnson uses and what you can rank in the rejuvenation Olympics with. There were six men and women between the ages of 39 to 76. They took the speed of aging test first before starting Novos and then they started taking Novos core with two hundred and fifty milligrams of NMN per day for six months. After the six months, eight people saw a reduction in their speed of aging score. The average percentage decrease was 6.1 percent and one participant saw a decrease of 14%. However, not everyone's score decreased. For three people, it stayed the same and one person dropped out of the study. But no one's speed of aging increased. A lot of people who were ranked at the rejuvenation Olympics, like Julie Gibson Clark, also said that she was taking Novos, and it was one of the things that she thought provided her the results that she got. It's not enough to make any conclusions, but it's a pattern. There's also a peer reviewed study from 2024 that looked at the effects of Novos on DNA damage in human skin cells. They first exposed skin cells to a Novos dilution and six other formulas for twenty four hours, And then they injured them with neocarizinostatin for two hours, which is an antibiotic that causes DNA damage. DNA damage analysis revealed that all of the six other formulations did induce the formation of DNA damage markers, but Novos didn't, Which suggests that Novos treatment had a preventive effect against DNA damage when exposed to a DNA damaging agent. However, one of the limitations of the study is that it lacks a direct measure of DNA damage as the authors themselves say. They only looked at five three b p one, which is a recognized marker of DNA damage, but is not a direct measure. There's also a small pilot study on four subjects who took Novo's core for six months and saw improvements in their skin firmness and suppleness. The average improvement across both cheeks was 22 with one subject seeing a 40% improvement on the right cheek and another person seeing only 12% improvement at minimum. They did use an indendometer which is a state of the art device for measuring skin stiffness. However, it's such a small study with so few participants which is again not enough to make any conclusions. Besides skin cells, Novos has also been seen to reduce DNA damage in human umbilical vein endothelial cells after irradiation. Basically, they expose cells to Novos and NMN before exposing them to irradiation. The cells getting treated with Novos beforehand saw sixty six percent lower DNA damage compared to controls. So this appears to be a consistent effect from Novos that the ingredients in Novos provide DNA protection effects. Alright. Now let's look at each individual ingredient in Novos to see what does the research say about those ingredients to see if there is any mismatch between the doses. Because Novos is supposed to target the hallmarks of aging, I'm also going to look at each hallmark of aging. Before I begin, make sure you hit the like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. The first ingredient is vitamin c. In terms of the hallmarks of aging, then vitamin c helps to regulate genomic stability and DNA methylation. Genomic instability is one of the hallmarks of aging. And with age, your genome becomes more dysregulated. Vitamin c also lowers inflammation as shown by human clinical trials because of its antioxidant effects. And chronic inflammation is another hallmark of aging. However, antioxidants like vitamin c might even have negative effects on exercise adaptations. It's known that antioxidants like vitamin c impair muscle growth signaling after exercise. And there's also evidence that vitamin c decreases muscle mitochondrial biogenesis, the growth of new mitochondria in endurance exercise. To be fair, you could avoid it by just taking vitamin c before exercise not afterwards. But it still highlights the point that excessive amounts of antioxidants might not always be beneficial. And taking vitamin c before exercise with collagen is probably a smarter idea anyway because it's been shown to increase collagen synthesis in the tendons. Regarding skin, hair and nails, then yes. Vitamin c is essential for initiating collagen synthesis. However, the studies on this are done with topical vitamin c not the oral supplement. There is one study that found that oral supplementation of vitamin c and e in eighteen people increased the dose of UVB radiation from the sun needed to cause redness of the skin. The subjects also saw less skin lesions after getting sunburned when they were taking vitamin c and e. A 2007 epidemiological study found that people who ate more dietary vitamin c like fruits and vegetables had a lower likelihood of a wrinkled appearance and senile dryness. Now this refers to dietary vitamin c, not the one you get from supplements, which could be that healthier foods have more vitamin c. And if you eat healthier foods, you have less wrinkles. What about the risk of chronic diseases like heart disease? A 2007 randomized controlled trial on over eight thousand women over the age of 40 with history of cardiovascular disease and with three or more other risk factors found that quote, there were no overall effects of vitamin c, e, or beta carotene on cardiovascular events among women at high risk for cardiovascular disease. Another 2004 randomized controlled trial took over 13,000 middle aged people and told them to take antioxidants including ascorbic acid for seven point five years. They found that the antioxidants didn't reduce the risk of total cancer incidence, ischemic heart disease, or all cause mortality in women. But men did see a reduction in the incidence of total cancer and all cause mortality. The researchers hypothesized that this could be because men have a baseline lower antioxidant status and a lower intake of foods that contain antioxidants, such as fruit and vegetables, which explains the results. And on top of that, a 2017 Cochrane review of clinical trials concluded that vitamin c supplementation doesn't reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease. So supplemental vitamin c and other antioxidants don't appear to provide additional protection for cardiovascular disease that you wouldn't get from diet. Vitamin c in Novos is supposed to complement calcium alpha ketoglutarate which we'll talk about later. But now let's take a look at magnesium. Magnesium is indeed one of those minerals that a lot of people aren't getting enough of. And magnesium deficiency increases the risk of many chronic inflammatory conditions. Magnesium deficiency is also at the center of all the hallmark of aging. I don't think I really need to talk about magnesium a lot more and you can check out my recent video about it. And Novos has a decent dose of magnesium three zero four milligrams which is about seventy two percent of the recommended daily allowance. So Novos is great for getting your daily magnesium in an easy way. But what about magnesium malate specifically? Malate or malic acid is derived from the Latin word apple because you can find malate from apples. However, all living organisms make malate themselves as well. Malate has been seen to extend lifespan in roundworms by supporting mitochondrial energy production, but the effect isn't massive. Magnesium malate specifically can be most useful for exercise performance and fatigue. And it's one of the most bioavailable forms of magnesium. So I think that magnesium malate is a good choice, but I personally prefer things like magnesium taurate or orotate specifically for the heart. Especially in light of taurine having been seen to extend lifespan in mice. Next, we have glycine which has been seen to extend the lifespan of mice in the interventions testing program by four to six percent. That doesn't sound like a lot, but it's still significant. In terms of the hallmarks of aging, then glycine has quite a lot of effects. Glycine induces autobachi, which is one hallmark of aging. Glycine also lowers inflammation, which is another hallmark of aging. And glycine mimics methionine restriction, which has been seen to extend lifespan in animals. The glycine cleavage system also promotes stem cell pluripotency, and it regulates cell senescence and epigenetic modifications, which are all hallmarks of aging. In human clinical trials on diabetics, supplementing five grams of glycine three to four times a day improves hemoglobin a one c levels and lowers inflammation. For sleep, a three gram dose has also been seen to improve sleep quality and duration. Glycine is also needed for collagen turnover, and a minimal requirement for collagen turnover is twelve grams of glycine per day. Your body makes three grams, but those three grams are needed for gluathione synthesis. So optimally, you need at least ten grams of glycine per day for optimal collagen turnover. Those doses are quite large, and Novos has only two grams of glycine. I personally think that the two grams is too low especially because most people aren't getting that much glycine from their diet. You get glycine from skins, gelatin, tendons, and ligaments, etcetera. The average person eating muscle meat is probably getting only three to five grams of glycine from their diet, which leaves a five to eight gram deficit for glycine. Another thing I wanna talk about is NAC because the combination of NAC and glycine or glynaq has been seen to increase glutathione, which is a powerful antioxidant. There are several clinical trials on elderly people done over the last few years that have shown how glycine and n a c supplementation improves functional outcomes related to aging such as grip strength, walking speed, inflammation, body composition, and other hallmarks of aging. NAC is one of those compounds that has a potential for being a longevity molecule, which is why I'm surprised that it's not inside Novos, especially if you already have glycine. A 2020 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials concluded that NAC significantly decreased some markers of oxidative stress like homocysteine and MDA, but it had no effect on some other inflammatory markers like CRP or TNF alpha. The mean dosage in these studies was five hundred to two thousand milligrams per day, and the participants were 30 to 70 years old. So overall, I think that the two grams of glycine in Novos is not enough. And ideally, it should had about like a thousand milligrams of n a c on top of it. Next, we have calcium alpha ketoglutarate or AKG. This is quite interesting and there are most studies showing that calcium AKG extends lifespan by up to twenty percent and health span by 40%. We also have a 2021 clinical trial on humans where taking a thousand milligrams of calcium AKG for seven months reduced the DNA methylation age of 42 individuals by eight years. This sounds awesome to be eight years younger biologically, but the problem is that these DNA methylation age tests might not be always that accurate, and they're also affected by many other variables. On top of that, the study was done by a supplement company on their own supplement. So you have to take the results with a grain of salt. There is currently another clinical trial called ABLE being done that seeks to replicate these findings. They're using a thousand milligrams of calcium AKG for six months on 120 people between the ages of 40 and 60. And they'll also measure functional outcomes like grip strength, aerobic capacity, arterial stiffness, and inflammatory markers. For me, these secondary outcomes are a lot more valuable because they're much more predictive of future risk of chronic diseases like heart disease than the DNA methylation age as of now. AKG is involved in the metabolism, specifically the Krebs cycle that generates energy. AKG levels decline with age by about tenfold after the age of 40, which makes it plausible that supplementation could have health benefits. AKG maintains genomic stability synergistically with vitamin c through an enzyme called t e t, ten eleven translocation. Like glycine, AKG maintains the pluripotency of stem cells, and stem cell exhaustion is one of the hallmarks of aging. What about the clinical trials on AKG? There are indeed several human clinical trials over the past few decades that have shown that AKG helps with wound healing, immunity, and faster recovery from surgeries. A 2022 review on AKG stated, a few studies published in the nineteen eighties and nineteen nineties in humans suggested the potential benefits of AKG in muscle growth, wound healing, and in promoting faster recovery after surgery. So far, there are no recently published studies demonstrating the role of AKG in treating aging and age related diseases. Hence, further clinical studies are required to better understand the role of AKG in humans. Right now with AKG, I would say that we need more human studies to see what are the benefits. The reduction in DNA methylation age is something you have to take with a grain of salt. Now the dose in DOVOS is eleven hundred milligrams for calcium AKG, which corresponds with the doses used in those studies. But it also gives you two hundred and thirty one milligrams of calcium. I'm a bit cautious of that because calcium supplements can cause hypercalcemia in the blood, which is associated with cardiovascular events in randomized controlled trials. But that's mostly with larger dose calcium supplements like a thousand milligrams per day. It might be that arginine AKG gives you the same benefits as calcium AKG without the risk of hypercalcemia. But there aren't many clinical trials on arginine AKG yet. The lifespan studies in animals are done with regular AKG, so I don't see why it has to be calcium AKG specifically. Glucosamine sulfate is the next ingredient at a dose of a thousand milligrams. There's a bit of a controversy regarding the efficacy of glucosamine on joint function and osteoarthritis. For example, a 2,000 review of clinical trials concluded that glucosamine does improve osteoarthritis symptoms to a moderate to large degree, but the results might be due to bias. The standard clinical dose is one point five grams a day of glucosamine sulfate. However, there is reasons to think that larger doses of up to three grams are needed and that one point five grams isn't the optimal dose for maximum benefits. This is interesting because Novos only has a dose of one gram per day. Besides joint function, there's also observational studies finding that glucosamine supplementation is linked to up to a thirty nine percent lower risk of mortality and cardiovascular disease. The reason for that is thought to be because of glucosamine's anti inflammatory effects. Additionally, glucosamine sulfate at a dose of two hundred and fifty milligrams a day has also been seen to improve skin wrinkles by inhibiting MMPs and increasing collagen synthesis. So taking one thousand milligrams a day of glucosamine can have benefits on skin wrinkles And probably also has some anti inflammatory effects. But the optimal dose could be up to three grams per day. Rhodiola rosea is an adaptogen that helps to regulate your nervous system. There are studies in ground worms and yeast that show rhodiola extends lifespan. In terms of the hallmarks of aging, then rhodiola helps with mitochondrial function and protein folding. Rhodiola rosea is an adaptogen that has been seen to have benefits on stress in clinical trials. The dosages used in these clinical trials are usually around two hundred to six hundred milligrams per day, which corresponds with Novus's dose of three hundred milligrams. Doses below two hundred milligrams have also been seen to have anti fatigue effects in sports. Next, we have theanine which is an amino acid you get from tea. A 2021 randomized controlled trial did find that l theanine at a dose of a hundred milligrams improved attention and executive function in middle aged and older adults. Another 2022 clinical trial found that two hundred milligrams of theanine supported mental health in people with stress related ailments or cognitive impairment. And a 2023 systematic review discovered that theanine at a dose of fifty to six hundred and fifty five milligrams a day showed promise in improving sleep quality. So overall, theanine is pretty safe and it appears to have benefits for stress and sleep. Novos contains a hundred and fifty milligrams which is a good dose. For skin antiaging, Novos has a hundred milligrams of hyaluronic acid. Hyaluronic acid in the skin starts decreasing after the age of 25. And a 75 year old person has only one fourth of the hyaluronic acid as someone who is 19 years old. In a 2021 randomized controlled trial, they foamed at a hundred and twenty milligrams a day of hyaluronic acid for twelve weeks, improved skin condition and decreased wrinkles in 40 healthy Asian people between the ages of 35 and 64. Another 2017 randomized controlled trial showed that oral hyaluronic acid at a dose of a hundred and twenty milligrams a day and at both a molecular weight of two kilodaltons and 300 kilodaltons improved skin condition and wrinkles. But the higher molecular weight of 300 kilodaltons showed significantly greater effects in alleviating wrinkles. So a supplemental dose of a hundred and twenty milligrams a day of hyaluronic acid appears to have a positive effect on skin wrinkles and skin aging. Novos has a dose of a hundred milligrams, which might be too low, but it might be enough as well. Fisetin is a senolytic compound similar to quercetin or apigenin that you get from strawberries. This means that it reduces senescent cells which are pro inflammatory dead cells that accumulate during aging. Cell senescence is one of the primary hallmarks of aging. When it comes to the elimination of senescent cells, then fisetin appears to be superior to quercetin as shown by this 2018 study. In the same study, fisetin was also seen to extend lifespan of mice. However, fisetin didn't extend lifespan in the National Institute of Aging's interventions testing program in 2023. The interventions testing program is considered the gold standard for testing life extension effects of different molecules in mice. That's because they employ genetically heterogeneous mice in three different laboratories. So it's more consistent and reproducible. As of now, I would say that fisetin probably doesn't extend lifespan, but it still has effects on senescent cells. Fisetin also has anti inflammatory effects and it inhibits matrix metalloproteinases, MMPs, which break down collagen. A 2018 randomized controlled trial showed that fisetin can reduce inflammatory markers such as CRP and MMPs in colorectal cancer patients. So fisetin is a good addition if you wanna target senescent cells specifically. But at the moment, we don't have any human clinical trials on these senolytics. So we don't know what's the optimal dose or what's the optimal frequency to take senolytics. Ginger is another herb with anti inflammatory benefits. A 2022 review found that human studies show how ginger improves inflammation. A 2024 meta analysis of 27 randomized controlled trials showed a significant link between ginger supplementation of two grams a day and weight loss, waist circumference, and body fat loss. A 2022 meta analysis concluded that ginger supplementation lowered blood sugar and hemoglobinima c in people with type two diabetes. The doses used in these studies were between twelve hundred to three thousand milligrams per day. Novoz uses a hundred milligrams which appears to be a bit of an under dose. Pterostilbene is a stilbenoid just like resveratrol. You can get pterostilbene from berries, grapes, and almonds. Pterostilbene is said to have much higher bioavailability than resveratrol. 80% versus 20%. Mechanistically, pterostilbene improves DNA repair, induces autophagy, and lowers inflammation. Unfortunately, there aren't many clinical trials using pterostilbene, and a lot of them are still being done. In doses of two hundred and fifty to four hundred and fifty milligrams a day, pterostilbene has been seen to be safe for human consumption. However, pterostilbene also raises LDL cholesterol and lowers HDL cholesterol. In a 2014 randomized controlled trial, pterostilbene at a dose of fifty or a hundred and twenty five milligrams twice a day lowered blood pressure while raising LDL cholesterol when used alone, but not in combination with grape extract. So I think that no one should probably add a hundred milligrams of grape extract to attenuate the LDL raising effects of pterostilbene. Because pterostilbene at a dose of even fifty milligrams a day can raise LDL. But other than that, there's no other evidence from human clinical trials for pterostilbene. Lithium is the final ingredient and it's quite interesting. Historically, lithium has been used to treat bipolar disorder. However, there's an interesting link between lithium and brain aging and mental health. A 2015 meta analysis of randomized placebo controlled trials found that lithium treatment could reduce cognitive decline and be beneficial in people with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's dementia. There are also observational studies linking lithium intake to lower rates of dementia and cognitive impairment in elderly people. Studies on roundworms have also shown that lithium extends their lifespan by up to 46% and slows down aging. Overall, lithium has mood stabilizing effects and it might have neuroprotective effects as well. Norvos contains one milligram of lithium which is the standard dose. Personally, I like that lithium is inside here but the current evidence suggests that it only works for people with mild cognitive impairment or dementia. And we don't know if it has any preventive effects. Alright. So we've gone through all of the ingredients one by one. Overall, I find most of the ingredients great with the right doses. But some of them also appear to be slightly under dosed. Now this might not be a problem because as I said earlier, the combination and synergy of these ingredients in those exact amounts might be better than each ingredient alone. And the studies I went through here are all done mostly on the single ingredients. That's why it's important to look at the clinical trials specifically on Novos with all of the ingredients together to get a grip on if it has any effects. Because you're gonna take the Novos unless you take each individual ingredient. Right now, it would be too early to say anything conclusive, but Novos appears to have benefits on inflammation and DNA damage. My overall rating for Novos is four out of five because you get a lot of the big hitters in the right amounts such as magnesium, AKG, glucosamine, and theanine. One last thing we can talk about are the flavors. You can either get the unflavored or orange flavored mix, which tastes pretty good. The sweeteners are erythritol and stevia, which are one of the better sweeteners. If you want me to review all the ingredients in Brian Johnson's blueprint supplement stack, then check out this video next. I go through each ingredient the same way I did in this video. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click a like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is Sim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.