Repairing the body, actually reversing, reducing biological age is likely to be a lot easier than slowing aging down. If we get to this whole year of extension of life from starting in middle age, then we are going to have a full blown full scale war on aging. Welcome to the Cignon podcast. Our guest today is doctor Aubrey de Grey. Aubrey is one of the world's leading gerontologists. He's spearheading foundations that seek to extend human lifespan. In this episode, we talk about his predictions regarding the longevity escape velocity, which is a concept where medical science has reached a point you'll be able to outpace aging. Aubrey, welcome to the show. Well, thank you for having me. Yeah. I'm super excited and honored to have you on the show. I've read a lot of your books and I'm also a huge, I guess, like a fan of the idea of the longevity escape velocity. And, coincidentally, it's actually been, like, twenty years since you published the first paper on this topic or where you coined the term. So, it's kind of two decades have passed. So what are your let's say we can begin with like you can maybe explain it a little bit what you wrote twenty years ago and maybe how has your opinion about this changed, you know, twenty years later? Sure. Yeah. Okay. So the idea of longevity escape velocity, which, as you say, I first talked about in 2,004, arose from the big idea I had four years earlier, which was that repairing the body, actually reversing, reducing biological age is likely to be a lot easier than, slowing aging down. In other words, slowing down the rate at which biological age increases. And that has, of course, dominated and, defined my scientific research ever since. It's remarkable how well the, plan that I put forward back then, which was first published in 2002, has stood the test of time. I have not had any requirement to, you know, expand my original list of seven deadly things as I called them. And, you know, that means that it's quite likely that nobody will ever have to expand that list and that once we can develop ways to actually do the damage repair in each of those cases, we will be in a very good position. So how does longevity escape velocity arise from all of that? Well, it is a consequence of the fact that rejuvenation, restore reducing of biological age, buys time. The, slowing down of biological age aging, is better than nothing. But if you're already in middle age when one starts to do that, then one doesn't actually gain very much. Eventually, one gets sick anyway. Whereas if you take someone who's, let's say, 60 or 70 and you restore them to being biologically 40 or something, then, you know, it's gonna be another twenty years before they get to be biologically 60 again. And, that's time that people like me can spend, improving the therapies. The reason one would not take someone age 60 or 70 back to biologically 20 is because the initial, damage repair portfolio is not going to be a 100% comprehensive. We are going to be able to fix some things more easily than others, but there's gonna be some easy damage we can fix and some difficult damage we can't fix. And, what's gonna happen, therefore, is that, you know, when the person comes in aged biologically 60 for the second time, when they're 80 or whatever, they're actually not really gonna be biologically 60 because all the damage that makes them biologically 60 is gonna be difficult damage that the therapies don't work on, which means that however often and thoroughly we apply these therapies, the person's still gonna get older, biologically, which is not not the idea. Right? So the point is that in those twenty years, we will have improved the comprehensiveness of the rejuvenation, which means that those same people, even though they're full of difficult damage, can be re rejuvenated, so that because we've shifted some of the difficult damage into the easy category, so to speak. And, so they won't be biologically 60 for the third time until, well, let's say, you know, chronologically a 110 and so on. So the definition, the formal definition of longevity escape velocity is simply, it's the minimum rate at which we need to the scientists need to be improving the comprehensiveness of these therapies, in order to stay one step ahead of the problem for people who are getting the state of the art therapies at any particular point. And we never have to get 100%, perfect, repairing damage. We just have to approach a 100% sufficiently fast. Furthermore, the rather heartening thing is that that rate at which we have to approach a 100% slows down over time. This is not a case of, you know, accelerating change like the singularity Because the more that we can fix, the less that we have left that we can't fix, the longer it's gonna take for that ultra difficult damage to become abundant enough to cause us to get sick. So this means that once we reach, longevity escape velocity for the first time, the hard part is definitely done. It's vanishingly unlikely that that we will ever fall below longevity escape velocity after that. So somebody, a friend of mine back in about 2007, coined the term the materiality by contrast with the, singularity to define this one point. So you ask, last part of your question was, how have my views changed? There's one thing that's changed a little bit in relation to all of this, and that is, with regard to, how soon we're going to reach longevity escape velocity. In particular, how much we are going to have to postpone the health problems of late life in order to be at the thesularity in the first place. Originally, I said, I thought we'd we'd probably need thirty years, a a thirty year increase, because thirty years is what we would need to be able to make enough improvements to get the next thirty years. But now I think I've reduced that number to about twenty years. That's simply because things are moving faster now. Well, I mean, our biology, biomedical research is moving faster, and it's gonna you know, they'll probably continue to move faster. So, the threshold of the materiality, is easier than it used to be. Now, of course, if we look at actual time frames, you know, how soon we're going to reach the materiality, then it's much more difficult question because it it's still some way off, and therefore, you know, it's we we can only speak in in terms of probabilities, in terms of predictions, you know, because, unfortunately, an optical may may occur. So I say that I think that, we have, a certain amount of chance of getting to a particular point with, you know, that chance. And, specifically, I always talk about the 50% chance. I think we have a 50% chance as of now of guessing to the materiality within the next twelve to fifteen years, so in the second half of twenty thirties. And, of course, that has slipped over time. Twenty years ago, I when I first started making such predictions, when I said it would be be about twenty five years, and, you know, it's it it has slipped. However, the good news is that pretty much all of the slipping occurred in the first ten years of those twenty, essentially, because research went a lot more slowly because it was so poorly funded. In the in the past ten years, the second ten years, things have been a lot better. A lot more money has been coming into the field, and things have duly started moving a lot faster. Now I will say that the money that's come in, even though it is enormous compared to what was available beforehand, is very, very unevenly distributed. And that means that we still have a lot to do to make sure that, you know, that that that money is not rate limiting. Nevertheless, you know, we're getting there. There's more and more, you know, things that are hard, things that are difficult and, you know, hard to make money out of, that are increasingly being funded. So, you know, I'm still pretty hopeful right now. The final thing I wanna say in terms of what's changed over time is the reception to all of this. When I started out twenty year twenty odd years ago, and I started talking about rejuvenation, everybody thought I was crazy. Virtually nobody understood in the field what I was even talking about, and I was get accused of being unscientific and so on. It took less about ten years to fix that, to really, you know, win the argument and get people to understand that this made sense. And, the real, like, the the the the real end of that period, the kind of definitive end was the publication of the Hallmarks of Aging paper in 2013, which was basically a restatement of what I had said a decade earlier, but which was published in a top journal by people with lots of credentials and, therefore, you know, was very much accepted. And that paper had become, by a huge distance, the, the most highly cited paper in the whole of the biology of aging this century, and it's very likely to stay there. But what hasn't happened or certainly had not happened by that time was a widespread acceptance of the concept of longevity escape velocity, which honestly shocked me because the time frames and the plausibility of getting to the material, getting twenty years of extra life is very, very uncertain. I was proposing quite a number of very ambitious research programs to get there. So I think it was reasonable to be skeptical about at least some of that. But once we get those twenty years, the whole concept of longevity escape velocity is inescapable. I mean, it's just just high school maths, if that. Right? So I was, like, completely shocked. But, of course, the reason is the conclusion, which is that we what the a lot of people alive today have a good chance of living indefinitely. And, you know, that sounds politically scary to a lot of people. So they run away very fast irrespective of the logic. Now even that is beginning to change now. A number of people are talking about longevity escape velocity correctly. You know, a number of people, especially the people who, you know, who did their undergraduate degree in math, which is a few biologists, are actually, you know, talking about it as obvious and inevitable. And the other media is picking up on it now in a manner that resembles what happened with rejuvenation. You know? They're getting to be more respectful about it and talking about it as realistic even if they still talk about it as speculation. So, yeah, a lot has changed in and all of it has changed in a positive manner. Yeah. Yeah. That's quite, interesting. So you're saying, like, that within this twelve to fifteen years, we'll reach a point where I guess like a simple way to put it is that, with every passing year, your life expectancy will still increase by one year or even two years. So you're outpacing death with the advancements in this regenerative technologies and medicine. Exactly that. Yes. I mean, though I do want to emphasize again in case anyone missed it the first time that I only think that we have a fifty percent chance of getting there within the next twelve Right. Year. I think there's at least a five percent chance that we won't get there for a hundred years if we hit a lot of problems. You know, I always have to emphasize that. Mhmm. Gotcha. And, yeah, I mean, I agree that, you know, over the last even, like, four years or so, the talk about longevity has become almost, like, mainstream, and a lot of people are interested in that. So, I guess the question is that has then there been any, like, hints of, more advancements in this, science regarding anti aging and longevity that we are more confident in saying that in, you know, twelve, fifteen years we'll reach that point? Because, you know, correct sorry. I'll, like, correct if if I'm wrong, but I think the longest, you know, life extension in mice was achieved even, like, forty years ago, and there hasn't been, like, much breakthroughs in that, since that time. Yeah. Right. So, I mean, of course, the only reason why my time frames have been coming down as time has passed in the past ten years when I didn't really come down the previous ten years, is because of progress. You know? I mean, that's the that's my measure because I'm at the coalface seeing all the things that are happening. Now, of course, you're absolutely right that right now, we have not succeeded in extending lifespan in mice by any more than we could do with calorie restriction, you know, forty years ago or more. Yeah, forty years ago is actually about the right number to you because that in the early nineteen eighty was the first time that people tried to do calorie restriction on mice that were already in middle age at the time. And, the most that has been achieved there is, about four months of additional life on such mice. Now, that is really why I have specified a threshold, which I call robust mouse rejuvenation, for, what we need to achieve doing damage repair. And that threshold is to achieve three times more of an effect size than what has been achieved thus far. So in other words, we still have start with middle aged mice, mice that have roughly one year to live on average. That means they're one and a half years old already. They normally live to about two and a half, and then we double that. We give them two years of life on average, maybe two and a half, two and three quarters to the maximum for for the maximum, the oldest mice. Now that would be three times as much. A one year is three times four months. Right? So I believe that not only will that demonstrate to scientists that we are really, you know, we've really got the hang of this, that damage repair is gonna be much more effective than anything else. But, also, it will completely change the conversation in the wider world. It will really convince people that we have a handle on this now. So as you say, you know, you can't measure progress by trend analysis of lifespan experiments. But, yeah, then you couldn't do that with powered flight either. You know what I mean? It didn't we we, if you if you ask someone in 1900 how long it would take in 1950 to cross the Atlantic, Then they might look at how long it took in 1850 and 1800 and 1750. You know? They would say that the liners were getting progressively faster at a very slow rate, and they would have come up with a very wrong answer for how long it takes to get across the Atlantic in 1950. So, that's how technology is. You have to actually know all about the details that have not yet come together, in order to come up with a realistic answer. And, honestly, it is utterly scandalous that top journals still insist on publishing completely vacuous papers doing trend analysis and, you know, coming up with pessimistic answers for how soon anyone will live to a 150, let alone a thousand. Right. Right. Yeah. It's, you know, how long did it took from the first airplane for us to have, like, jet planes and space travel? Or, you know, going to space? So it was, like, rather short time. That's another important thing. Yes. The predictability of fundamental breakthroughs in terms of time frames is nil. You know? We all talk about how, like, you know, top physicists were saying that per flight was impossible right up until it was done. But we must also remember that Leonardo da Vinci was designing, you know, heavier than air flight for a hundred years pre previously, and he probably didn't think it was gonna take that long to, make it work. So you just can't do it. Whereas, once the fundamental breakthrough has been made, incremental refinements of that breakthrough to, you know, get better better performance tend to be rather predictable, especially when, you know, there is public demand for it, which is not going to be in short supply for this particular type of breakthrough. Right. Yeah. So you mentioned that earlier that rather than focusing on slowing down the speed of aging, we would want to, yeah, like, regenerate the body. So, like, would it be then that calorie restriction is an attempt to slow down aging and it's it's not, you know, regenerating in the body, which is why it hasn't yielded a very super impressive, results. That's right. And it's worse than that. Not only does calorie restriction, you know, have a kind of, brick wall that it hits, That brick wall is a lot sooner in longer lived species. Longer lived species get far less impact from calorie restriction than short lived ones do. Right. And this is this is perfectly predictable from evolutionary theory, but it's not surprising that it was terribly swept under the carpet for a long time. Now, of course, one thing we do have now that we didn't have forty years ago or even twenty years ago is color restriction mimetics, drugs that make the body think that it's not getting enough food when it actually is. And these are handy because, of course, people like eating, and therefore, you know, you can get you even though you don't get much of color restriction, at least you can get maybe the same amount, without having to actually start yourself. However, the critical thing is you're never gonna get more than what you get with calorie restriction itself because you're activating the same metabolic, you know, you know, reprioritizations, so to speak. So in fact, we care about this. And in our study, our big combination rejuvenation study that we've been doing since early last year, we did use rapamycin, which is the best calorie restriction mimetic right now, as, one of our interventions because we wanted to use it as a a good baseline, to compare with the various damage repair interventions that we were also putting in. And, this has worked out rather well in the sense that rapamycin certainly has worked in our hands same as it has worked in everyone else's hands. And we can look at, you know, what the what the other treatments, achieve in combination with it. Right. So it just buys you more time to, perhaps live a Buying you more time. But also, what's rather important is that there's always a debate about whether calorie restriction is a treatment or whether it is the natural state. And the ad lib feeding is the overeating, which is kind of making you making you shortening your lifespan. This is true in humans, and to be honest, it's also true in mice. Mice get fatter as they get older. So, you know, it's a question. So, basically, what we're thinking that we'll do in subsequent rejuvenation combo combo rejuvenation studies is we're just gonna give everyone rapamycin. We're not gonna try and, like, you know, recapitulate something that people already know, namely that rapamycin works. We're just going to use that as the baseline on which we want to add more. Gotcha. Right. So what is then, let's say, the invisible technology, the breakthrough that we would need to see for us to really make these big breakthroughs in, lifespan and regeneration? So the key thing about rejuvenation is that it's a divide and conquer approach that, you know, just like most complicated engineering, right, it's, you've gotta get a lot of different components working, all of them reasonably well before you can put them together and get the overall desired, result. And so, you know, I've always had this seven point plan, but we must be clear about what that plan actually means. You know, this each of the seven things is a category of damage, and there are many different examples within that category of, you know, types of damage in different organs, for example. So the reason the classification is useful is because it pairs up with a, a list of seven, damage repair approaches, each of which is generic. In other words, it can be used against all examples within the category. Though, of course, the details may be different. You know, you need different types of stem cell for different organs, for example. The however, there's a bunch of good news here. One is that there is now in each each of the seven categories, a choice. We have multiple different options for how to achieve the damage repairing question, which we certainly did not have twenty years ago. And the second thing that's rather good is knock on effects. If you repair one type of damage, then you make the body, less stressed. And the the you have the effect of slowing down the accumulation of other types of damage even though even if you're not actually, targeting those other types directly. So that's that that's probably gonna be also rather important. So what we've achieved so far with our study that's now which we call RMR one, the first, combination rejuvenation treatment that anyone's ever done, is, you know, we've we've got definite definite, you know, contributions. The two sexes obviously, doing this with a lot of male mice and a lot of female mice. The two sectors are behaving rather differently. But we and so, you know, we'll pick apart the statistics when the study is over, which is gonna be another few months yet. But it's obvious already from the kind of interim data, which, of course, I'm putting out on social media every month or two, that the, you know, that that that the impact is exactly what we were hoping to see. However, it's definitely we definitely have not hit it out of the park. You know? We're definitely not going to beat the record for what's been achieved in the past by all that much. We're certainly not gonna get to the one year that I wanna get to eventually. And what this tells us is we just are not hitting everything yet. We're not hit we're not, rejuvenating every aspect of damage. And so next time around, we're gonna be using different interventions. And if we can pull them put enough money together, we're gonna be doing, more than four interventions, the four that we have this time. I I I would very much like to be doing eight. The design of the study allows this. We look at subsets of the interventions as ways to make proper comparisons, but we don't do all the subsets. We only do each intervention individually, and we do all but one. So that means that the size of the study only grows linearly with the number of interventions, not exponentially. So we we really like to do one with, like, eight interventions. I wanna take a quick break to let you know that you can now get my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. It contains 24 chapters ranging from the biology of aging to all the major chronic diseases such as heart disease, kidney disease, neurodegeneration, and I also cover over 70 clinically relevant biomarkers for chronic diseases and their optimal ranges. You can get the book from the link in the description. You mentioned that the aspect of damage, which is like, you know, one characteristic of aging. So and and in the sense foundation, you've listed out, like, the seven categories of cellular damage that happened because of aging. So maybe we can go through some of these and, you know, give a brief explanation of what it is and what is the kind of, I guess, countermeasure against, that aspect of damage? Yeah. Well, so obviously, I've written and spoken a lot about this, so let's not, be too sorry here. But I can certainly Just a brief explanation. Yeah. So the one that I talk about, as a kind of illustration, most easily because it's just easiest to explain, is loss of cells. So loss of cells simply means cells dying and not being replaced by the division of other cells. And in some tissues, the cells just, you know, they die, and they are replaced by the division of other cells. And so there there isn't an accumulation of damage in the form of diminishing cell number. But in some other tissues, that's not the case. And the example that's easiest to discuss is Parkinson's disease, which is pretty much entirely caused by the death and nonreplacement of a particular type of brain cell called a dopaminergic neuron. These neurons are located in one very small part of the brain called the substantia nigra, and, they make dopamine, which is a very important chemical in the brain. And when there's not so many of those cells, there's not so much dopamine, and you get Parkinson's disease. Everybody loses about a quarter of their dopaminergic neurons by old age, but the system is set up to tolerate that. It's well, it's not set up to tolerate losing, like, three quarters of them, which is what some people do, and that's that those are the people who have Parkinson's disease. So the natural obvious approach to repairing that damage is stem cell therapy. You put cells in into the substantia nigra or thereabouts that, know what to do. You know? They they differentiate into the, required cells, the dopaminergic neurons, and lo and behold, you got dopamine back, and your pocket the disease goes away. That's the theory. Now in the nineteen nineties nineteen eighties, I think. No. Nineteen nineties, a group in Sweden, had a go at this. They said, alright. Let's try this. And they injected some stem cells into the brains of various Parkinson's patients. The problem was where did they get the stem cells? Back then, we didn't have, you know, the Yamanaka factors. We didn't have any real knowledge about how to manipulate stem cells. And so the only thing they could do was isolate stem cells from aborted fetuses. They got a hold of a bunch of aborted fetuses, and they tried to extract cells from the developing brain. And, you know, they did their best, but the substantia nigra is small, and the, you know, the, as it's called, the the the place where the stem cells are coming into existence is very, very small, and so it was rather hit and miss. And sure enough, nearly all of the people that they injected had no benefit. They no no harm, but no benefit because the cells were the wrong cells. They didn't differentiate into the right kind of neuron, so it nothing happened. But a few people got lucky. A few people got the right kind of cell, and there, the results were spectacular. There was actually the group, wrote a kind of retrospective case study a few years ago on the I think it was the twenty fifth anniversary of the treatment of the first person who actually responded. And, you know, basically, the guy was, you know, proper Parkinson's, was getting the standard of care at the time, which is a precursor of dopamine called l Dopa. Said it was completely went away after one injection. So they took him off l DOPA, and still there were no symptoms for more than ten years. Eventually, the injected dopaminergic neurons started to deteriorate, but, you know, it took a very long time. So that's about as close to a cure as you can imagine. And now that we of course, now that we have, you know, far better understanding of how to manipulate stem cells in the laboratory before injecting them, you know, it's it's a completely different world. And there are, I think, five clinical trials either already in progress or about to start, trying to do the the same thing. And, you know, everyone's very hopeful. So that kind of thing. Interesting. Now, of course, as I mentioned, there are, multiple ways to do each of the types of damage repair. In the in the case of cell loss, the main thing that's come along very recently is something called partial reprogramming. So this is basically injection of these things called the Yamanaka factors into the body. The idea here is that the cells that we do have in the body that are still there may be less regenerative, less stem like than we than they used to be and that we'd like them to be. Now these Yamanaka factors reverse that. They essentially turn back the developmental clock of of cells just a little bit so that, they become more stem like and more regenerative. And that has essentially the same effect as injecting bona fide induced stem cells. Whether it would work for Parkinson's disease, not clear because the cells are gone. But it should work in other cases where the stem cells are just less stem like. Gotcha. Right. So in the in the example of the longevity escape velocity, you would get injected with new stem cells every few years to keep them, I guess, that prevent from from fading away. Yes. But more than that, so you yes. You'd get injected with new stem cells every decade or whatever, but the key thing about longevity escape velocity is that stem cell therapy for some organs or tissues is easier than it is for others. So let's talk let's carry on talking about the brain. A key feature that makes stem cell therapy for Parkinson's disease possible is that the cells that are needed that make dopamine are located in this very small part of the brain called the substantia nigra. You can just inject them into the right place. Mhmm. Whereas, in, for example, Alzheimer's disease, eventually, in the later stages of Alzheimer's disease, you've got other types of neurons dying all over the brain, and that's much harder to fix. You can obviously inject stem cell precursors into the, brain same as you can for Parkinson's disease. But the thing about the brain is it's not like the circulation. It's not like the bloodstream. There is a fluid that the cells are bathed in. It's called the cerebrospinal fluid, but it's viscous. It's very sticky, which means that when you stick stem cells into it, they just sit there. They don't move around and disperse all over the brain, which is what you'd need them to do. So we need a we need a better trick for that. And there is one that, has been worked on for the past decade or so by one group at Albert Einstein College of Medicine. It's essentially genetic engineering to make these neuronal precursors swim and actually actively disperse around the brain, before they differentiate to become real neurons. The way one does this is by getting them to emulate the gene expression patterns of another type of brain cell called a microglial cell. It's a very clever idea, but it's a a very exploratory stage right now. It's very much not ready for clinical trial. So I can see that as the kind of thing that we would do, you know, after we had reached longevity escape velocity in order to stay. Gotcha. Right. Would there be any, like, method of, I guess, cloning or creating stem cells? Because right now, they're getting them from these umbilical cords. Right? Most of them. So is there a way to, like, create stem cells in the lab that act like more potent or kind of smarter stem cells? It's it's it's not so much the potency. So we can certainly make arbitrarily potent stem cells using the Yamanaka factors in the laboratory. And we so in in in other words, the reason for, you know, isolating umbilical cells or cells from the amniotic amniotic fluid or from the placenta, those reasons are less pressing than they used to be, because we can make those cells now. Now that's not necessarily the whole story because it takes time to make them and so on, but it most of the story. However, one thing that is very important here is whether those stem cells have your gen have the have the genetic code of the person who's going to receive them. So if you take stem cells from somebody else and you inject them into you, then they're gonna be rejected by the immune system, just like an organ transplant. The rejection may take a while because early stage powerful stem cells tend not to be very immunogenic, but they're immunogenic enough. They won't they won't last long. And they may do good anyway in the near term before they get killed off by the immune system, but it's not ideal. So that's called an allogeneic stem cell transplant. But what one can do instead is start from the person who's going to receive the cells. You take cells from that person. You dedifferentiate them, as it's called, using these factors. So you've got the right kinds of stem cells that you want, but they do have the genetic code of the recipient. And then you inject them back, and there's no immune reaction. That's called an autologous stem cell transplant. And the pros and cons here, autologous is far better because the cells last, but it's also far more expansive and difficult to, do because that you you need to do it you need to do it one off for each patient, whereas the allogeneic ones can be off the shelf, so to speak. Gotcha. Right. So we talked about cell loss and, like, replacing them with stem cells. What about like limbs and bones and those kind of things? Like, would it be if you were like maintain these healthy cells and rejuvenate the cells with the organ or the limbs maintain quote unquote like younger younger phenotype with the limbs, or would you also have to end up replacing limbs and organs and those kind of things? Yeah. So, honestly, it's hard to know at this point. I've always said, and it's still true, that at the first stage when we reach longevity escape velocity, central one point o, let's call it, the the bits that are not working well yet, and they're still clunky, will matter. And, therefore, we may very well require organ transplantation for something. It may be able to grow a new organ in the laboratory and, you know, transplant it rather than repairing the existing organ in situ. Now, that can't really be done for limbs, because we don't know how to grow a limb. Though people are actually working on the idea of growing entire bodies without brains, that turns out to be genetically fairly straightforward, and, you know, using those as, as the transplant. But that's still a long, long way off. So, really, we want to be looking at doing in situ rejuvenation of everything, including muscle and bone, And there's no particular reason why we shouldn't be able to do that. And and for that matter, of course, the brain, which is an organ that, you know, if we replace that all in one go, that would rather defeat the object. So, so so, yes, we've got to do these things. And, you know, these things are all made of the same stuff as the rest of the body. You know, they're made of cells, and cells are made of the same stuff, you know, DNA and proteins and so on. So, the same kinds of approaches should certainly work everywhere in the body. Gotcha. Right. Yeah. I guess we can move with the some next type of damage, maybe the mitochondria. So, that's also, like, one of the main theories of aging, the mitochondrial free radical theory of aging. So how does the mitochondria relate here? So, yeah, the free radical theory of aging, of course, was first put forward in the nineteen fifties, and it became the mitochondrial free radical theory of aging in the nineteen seventies when the same guy, Denham Harmon, realized that mitochondrial mutations might matter. And, in the fifties, you know, Harmon was one of the number of people who were thinking along the same lines. And if he'd been hit by a truck that day, you know, someone else would have come up with the same theory six months later. In the case of the mitochondrial theory in the nineteen seventies, that was very much not the case. He was way ahead of his time. In fact, that idea really didn't become mainstream for another seventeen years after that. Nevertheless, we are here now. And, yeah, might have gone through mutations accumulate during life, and there is good reason to believe that they matter. The specific pathologies that they contribute to, you know, that's still a matter of debate. And, indeed, the mechanism by which they accumulate and the mechanisms by which those that accumulation is toxic are still pretty unclear. But the absolute worst thing to do would be to just, like, wait and see, you know, to to spend our time just trying to understand and answer these questions and not actually try and do anything about the problem until we have these answers. That's the way that basic scientists think. They think they they think they need to understand everything about something before they actually try to manipulate it. Whereas engineers like me, we think in terms of, like, knowing enough, but not necessarily knowing everything. So what do we do about mitochondrial mutations? Well, the good news is that evolution has done much of the job for us. Mitochondria are these really, really complicated machines with well over a thousand proteins in them, and all but 13 of those proteins are actually imported into the mitochondrion naturally. They are, you know, they're synthesized in the body of the cell, the cytosol, and there is a system for importing them. So, theoretically, we could kind of piggyback on that system, on that machinery by putting copies of the mitochondrial mitochondrial protein coding genes into the nucleus along with the all the others and, having and and modifying them so that they are, substrates for that mitochondrial protein import machinery. This idea was first put forward in the nineteen eighties, and, it was made to work for one protein in one organism, namely yeast. Then it had a whole bunch of brick walls, and everyone gave up. And that kind of revived that whole area in the late nineties, early two thousands. We, at my previous foundation, have worked tirelessly on that idea, and we've made huge progress, but it's still not there. And I honestly don't know whether it ever will. I don't know whether we will be able to actually make this work. It's called allotopic expression. So I've always been on the lookout for ways to, achieve the same results without, atopic expression. And, essentially, the way that, one would try to do that is by selective selective pressure, essentially, to cause the mutant mitochondria to lose out in the natural selection process that goes on within each cell between mutants and non mutants. And there are various ways to do that that people have thought of, a couple that I thought of, but none of them have really got anywhere until now. We now have a few ideas for how we might be able to do that. Essentially, because we understand more closely the machinery of mitochondrial recycling and, and biogenesis, It would I would have to get very technical in order to go into the details, but this is another case where we have more than one alternative approach to addressing the problem than what we had twenty years ago. Gotcha. What about the elimination of these, worn out mitochondria that accumulate during aging? Well, that's what it would be, you see. Because mitochondria, even in, nondividing cells, they're constantly dividing. Some of them are being destroyed, and other ones are dividing to replace the ones that were destroyed. So that's why we have the opportunity of well, we we have the phenomenon of natural selection. Once there is any mutant mutant mitochondrial DNA, you've got genetically different populations that are competing with each other, And the idea is to bias that competition. Gotcha. Right. But one of the types of damage, the one of the seven ones is intracellular waste products and extracellular waste products. So two of them. Yeah. Can you really explain? Yeah. Sure. So, first of all, let's talk about extracellular waste. So the best, well known example of this is amyloid beta. This is the main constituent of cellular plaques in Alzheimer's disease. For quite a long time, people have been interested in using the immune system to get rid of this stuff, essentially causing the the immune system of the brain to engulf these, the this waste product because it's actually not very hard to break down once it's inside the cell. And so that's kind of enough. But, you know, people have had only limited success there. And in particular, even though now we can actually make that work, it doesn't have much impact on Alzheimer's disease, pathology, likely because Alzheimer's is a complicated disease that has a lot of other things going wrong at the same time as the accumulation of this plant material. But, however, the same idea can also be used elsewhere in the body. In the late gestation of diabetes, you have an accumulation of something that looks a bit like c and l plugs, but it's actually made of a different protein. And so we might be able to do the same thing. Then, in the heart, there's something called transthyroidine, which accumulates in this way, and this turns out to be really important in extremely old people. It was first discovered maybe fifteen ten ten or fifteen years ago in, in supercentenarians, people who are over the age of 110. And, actually, I funded an entire project that's now been spun out of the company to try to get rid of this stuff. The approach that we took was a bit different from the engulfing that I just mentioned. In this case, what we're looking at is actually proteolysis, chopping the stuff up in situ. And this is done with a special kind of antibody called a catabody. So that's for extracellular junk. For, intracellular junk, stuff that accumulates inside the cell, you've got a slightly different story. First of all, most of most of the examples of this happen in the lysosome, which is kind of the incinerator of the cell, the garbage disposal machinery of last resort. And the reason stuff accumulates there is because even though the lysosome is very, very good at breaking things down, there are some things that it can't break down. So this is the main cause of blindness in the elderly. We get this thing called macular degeneration, which is driven by the accumulation of a byproduct of vitamin a that, that the that the cell doesn't know how to break down. So, way back twenty five years ago, I had the bright idea of, using bacterial enzymes for this because, bacteria are extraordinarily versatile. You can find bacteria to break down more or less anything, and this is used in environmental decontamination to get rid of, you know, explosives in diffused airfield or anything like that. Anyway, it turns out to work. It turns out you can find bacteria that can break down the stuff that accumulates in macular degeneration. Now, of course, we would not want to inject those bacteria into the eye. That would be bad for you for various reasons. But what we can do is some genetic analysis. We can find out what genes they have that allow them to break down the material, and then we just do gene therapy, which it turns out is a lot easier in the eye than it is anywhere else. And so this is something that we pursued for quite a while in my foundation, then we spent it out as a start up company. And that company has progressed it further, and it's now about to be sold to big pharma. It's going pretty well. So, you know, that's that's, that's a big success story of that idea. Same kind of needs to happen with atherosclerosis, the number one killer in the Western world, of course. That's driven by this a similar process. In this case, the the waste product is not a byproduct a a derivative of vitamin a. It's a derivative of cholesterol. Cholesterol itself, people and you get the bad rap, but it's a very essential molecule. But it gets spontaneously oxidized sometimes, and some of those products are indigestible. And, again, so this has been addressed. In fact, the way in which that's been addressed most powerfully so far is not by breaking it down, but by extracting it, essentially, finding a way to get it out of the body. And, again, that's that's that's an equivalent approach. Interesting. Right. So there will be, like, this, I think I think one concept is, like, this xenocatabolism. Or is it, like, related to this? Xenocatabolism is a word I invented, for exactly what I said earlier, using bacterial or fungal enzymes to break down things that the human body can't do because the human genome doesn't have genes Right. Encoding enzymes that work. And in the future, you'll be able to, like, do it with, like, a pill, theoretically, or something? Probably not, to be honest. I think this will always be a gene therapy thing. This will always be a case where we, need to need to actually have have ourselves create a protein that they can't normally create. Now the other approach that I just mentioned for cholesterol where you're extract extracting it rather than breaking it down, that absolutely could be done, you know, without gene therapy. But in that case, again, we do need to inject. So the way in which that's being approached, again, by a spin out from my previous foundation, is using a molecule called cyclodextrin, which is a well known molecule used for lots of things in medicine. And, Margaret discovered a clever way to modify cyclodextrin so that it was specific to oxidized cholesterol and would preferentially extract that even without, you know, depleting the overall amount of cholesterol in the body, over overall amount of normal cholesterol, which is the main problem why you can't use high doses of statins because statins alter the they inhibit the synthesis of regular cholesterol. Gotcha. Right. How far is gene therapy then right now? Like, you know, you hear some rich people injecting them with gene therapy, but you yeah. Like, is there any evidence that it actually works as of now? Well, yeah. I mean, at the moment, there are lots of clinical trials going on with gene therapy. Now I mentioned a moment ago that the eye is a particularly easy place to do gene therapy. That's simply because of, immunogenicity. The eye basically doesn't have an immune system at all, and, therefore, you don't have an immune reaction when you inject foreign stuff, what you do have if you do it in the rest of the body. There are ways around the immunogenicity of, gene therapies, but they are at an earlier stage, which is why there are very few clinical trials so far outside of the eye. But but in the eye, there are lots. Yeah. Because it's not just about aging here. We've got lots of congenital diseases that you can address using gene therapy. And so that's being done. Yes. Gotcha. Yeah. You hear, like, your muscle growth, gene therapy, and, different kind of this clothe of protein, gene therapy, etcetera. So it might take a more time to see if it works. That's right. And, of course, what we've got now is early adopters having a go at this even though these things are not approved in Western in the Western world yet. The famous such person is undoubtedly my great friend, Liz Parish, who got into the field kind of sideways. She, was first interested in type one diabetes, the autoimmune disease, because her son has has that. But somehow or other, she, had the, you know, presence of mind to come to one of my conferences about, let me see, eleven years ago, and the rest is history, so to speak. She's been extraordinarily valuable in the field, and, she got that way basically by giving herself a platform. She got that a media platform, to be speaking and on, you know, staging on camera a lot, which she's fantastic at. And, she got that way by being what she calls patient zero, by Mhmm. Taking herself gene therapy in Latin America somewhere or telomerase and follistatin, which follistatin is a protein that enhances muscle quality and growth. And as you say, Clotho is the next one on the list, so to speak. Right. Gotcha. Yeah. Super interesting. But what what's gonna happen with, with that? Next would be we we can, yeah, briefly just mention some of, like, division of the cells and death resistant cells that are on the list. Yeah. Well, so let's do death resistant cells first because, of course, there's been huge progress there. That's a term that I coined to be a bit more general than a term that was already around and is still very popular called senescent cell. The cells, for various reasons, get into this aberrant state where they, you know, they are, either not doing what they were supposed to do or not doing it as well as they could. But in addition, they're actively toxic. They that the the toxicity aspect was only recognized maybe twenty five years ago. It was first put forward by a fantastic researcher who tragically died earlier this year named, Judy Campisi, who was actually also the first person, really, the only senior person in the whole of the biology of aging who immediately understood what I was saying about rejuvenation back in 2000. Anyway, Yeah. So you gotta get rid of yourself. And the immune system knows this, and it does its best to get rid of them. But some of them just resist the immune system in rather the same way that cancer cells resist the immune system. And so we have to find ways around that. And people have been trying all manner of things, and there are already a number of small molecules, including ones that are in clinical trials now, which selectively kill off the cell. The thing is the the selectivity isn't all that good yet. You know, it doesn't really work all that well, but people are grinding away, making it better and better, and we're getting, you know, we're getting really quite quite good to see analytics now as they're called drugs that do this. Another approach is to enhance the ability of the immune system to detect and destroy these cells. And, again, there's there's quite a bit of progress in that area, which is no surprise again because of the comparison with cancer. As you know, we've got huge advances in cancer immunotherapy over the past decade or two, you know, especially the past decade, and that's continuing. So that's all great. And then, of course, there is, cancer itself, which is the other cell, you know, having too many cells, strand of sense. And, yeah, I mean, cancer immunotherapy, you know, has made huge strides way back when I was start when I started running conferences more than twenty years ago. Every single conference, I would have one or one or two people who were experts in cancer immunotherapy. But it was a, you know, it was it was a bit tragic, really. There was no progress. And then suddenly, you know, ten or fifteen years ago, there were these two huge breakthroughs, the discovery of CAR T and the discovery of checkpoint inhibitors, which suddenly made immunotherapy for cancer work. I mean, not universally. It works mainly still mostly best on on blood cancers like leukemias and lymphomas. But, you know, people have obviously been improving it and refining it, and it's getting to the point of being able to work against solid tumors now as well. And there's, you know, there's more and more progress there. Then there is the approach that I put forward against cancer, which was to abrogate telomere elongation. And this was always, by far, the most ambitious and most speculative aspect of sense. There were definitely people who said that they bought everything else I was saying about damage repair, but there's no way we would get this this telomere, control thing to work. But that has become a lot better now as well because there's now something that I like to call WILT two point o, the, second generation of the idea I had in which we now have a way to kill off cells that, are expressing a lot of this telomere elongation enzyme telomerase, not just by stopping the enzyme from working, which would only slow down which we only call progressive telomere shortening, and therefore, would be a very slow way to kill a cancer. Now there are ways to essentially turn telomerase into a suicide gene. In other words, you get the drug, and if it's making telomerase, it, it incorporates the drug into the telomere, and that kills the cell very quickly. I could go into the mechanics of that, but, basically, yeah, it's it's fantastic. And that is also in clinical trials being led by a great company named Meyer Biotechnology. They spoke at my conference in Dublin last year. So the video of that talk is online. But I, I very much encourage people who wanna know more about that either to look look that company up or to write me. Gotcha. Right. But, is the telomeres, like does it also have, you know, beneficial effects for lengthening telomeres on healthy cells, or how does that differ to you? So so there have been a lot of oversimplification over the years of the pros and cons of of telomere length. For sure, you don't want your telomeres to be too short. And, indeed, the study that we've been doing, r m r one, over the past year and a half, one of the four interventions that we are including is, is gene therapy for telomerase to extend telomeres. Even though mouse mice normally have really long telomeres and they make a lot of telomerase naturally, it turns out that putting even more in is helpful because mice are so spectacularly bad at maintaining their DNA, especially their telomere DNA. So, yes, there are definitely benefits. But, the question is how much benefit would there be, in the body of in in the human body? And the answer is, well, there might be an impact on the immune system if we mess up telomerase, if we if we completely you know, if we didn't have a telomerase gene in the immune system. But most other places, it looks like there probably won't be a a problem because, first of all, cells most of our cell types just don't divide. Either they really really don't divide at all, like neurons, or they divide so rarely that they don't exhibit significant telomere shortening even in a whole normal lifetime. And then on the other hand, the cells that do divide reasonably often, like the blood stem cells, for example, yeah, they need a bit of telomerase, but they make a bit of telomerase naturally, but only a little bit. Right. So cancers make make tons of telomerase, which means that if you have this drug that makes telomerase into a suicide gene, it kills cancer cells really quickly. And it's easy to use the right kind of dosage, the right kind of duration of this drug so that you have a minimal effect on blood stem cells or stem cells in the gut, for example. So that's fine. As for the immune system, the great thing there is that the, telomerase expression is very closely regulated. So that cells only express they when they express telomerase, they do make quite a lot of it, but that's only during the very, brief phase when a, when the body is fighting off an infection. When that happens, of course, we have this thing called the adaptive immune system where the infection, is recognized by a teeny tiny minority, you know, very small fraction of 1% of our white blood cells. And that those those ones who recognize it are triggered to proliferate really fast. So we get a huge expansion, and that takes telomerase. But then once the infection has been overcome, those cells mostly die off, and the ones that don't die off are just become quiescent and no longer dividing. So, yes, you would not wanna do this telomere, this this telomere, killing thing while you have an infection, you know, while you're suffering from, you know, malaria or whatever. But any other time, absolutely, you'd be fine. Gotcha. Right. And the last is the extracellular matrix stiffening. Yeah. So when the Hallmarks paper came out in 2013, I was very pleased because I realized, and I was right, that that was the end of the battle I had been fighting for the previous decade. I would never again need to justify the whole damage of our approach to my colleagues. However, the fact is the Hallmarks paper was a bit mediocre in a number of ways. And one enormous way was they just left out stiffening. They just let the word glycation does not appear in the entire paper. And there are a few other problems, like we were talking about intracellular and extracellular junk a moment ago. In the Hallmarks paper, it only talked about proteinaceous junk. It talks about, you know, loss of proteostasis. So I've just given you two examples, cholesterol and modified vitamin a, which are not proteins. Right? And they were flipped out completely. Now, of course, the Hallmarks paper has been revised, both by the original authors and by other people in the past few years. And these thing these omissions have been somewhat corrected. There's still a few problems, but it's better than what a long way. But, yes, I mean, it was appalling that they left it out. I told them so, and they were embarrassed. But, anyway, yeah. So stiffening is caused by a process called glycation, which is a spontaneous chemical reaction between the proteins that make up the extracellular matrix, this lattice that gives our body its biophysical properties, and sugar in the circulation. And these reactions are slow and, you know, they are under control to some extent, but they still happen. And, eventually, you get these chemical bond between proteins that are not supposed to be bonded together, and that causes this loss of elasticity. So the goal is to break up those bonds to break those bonds. And and luckily, these bonds have a different chemical structure, very different chemical structure than anything that the body lays down on purpose. So it's not, you know, out of the question to be able to do this. But it turns out to be really hard because these bonds are, thermodynamically very stable. So if you find a small molecule that's a a drug that's able to break them, it's gonna be reactive, and it's gonna have side effects all over the shop. So that's pretty pretty challenging. One way out of that is to use enzymes. And because enzymes have extraordinary specificity. Right? So they they they can be reactive. They just won't react with the wrong thing. And that's the approach that people have been pursuing. We funded a group at Yale University for a number of years that made a huge breakthrough in that area, that was published in science and led to the spinning out of a company named Revel Pharmaceuticals, r u v e l, that, has, you know, made further progress. So we're still a long way from the clinic there. Well, fairly long way. But, yeah, big progress is being made. Gotcha. Wow. Yeah. That's super interesting. How so and with according to the longevity scale velocity theory, then, you know, we're going to make incremental progress in all of these different areas. And, you know, right now, they're all, like, pretty rudimentary, and we're getting better and better over the next, you know, five, ten, fifteen, twenty years. Exactly that. Yes. Gotcha. What would be, like, you know is there anything that's gonna happen within the next five years? Is there gonna be we're very close to some, like, more breakthroughs? Well, I mean, we're we're not gonna be at longevity escape velocity in five years. I'm pretty sure. But what will happen over this time is critical. You know, first of all, we're gonna get more and more things getting into clinical trials, including in offshore jurisdictions. I'm a particular fan of a place called Prospera, which is a special economic zone in Honduras, actually, on an island called Roatan, and which, is, you know, focused very much on medical tourism, especially in relation to longevity. And, you know, or, if all goes well, and they do have challenges, legal challenges, but they seem to be navigating those. If all goes well, then we are looking at, you know, that place being the global hub of medical tourism in the next couple of years. And that will make a huge difference because early adopters will go there and avail themselves with treatments, and they will talk about the results. And, you know, obviously, we need the results to be positive. But as time goes on and more and more positive results happen, there will be FOMO. There will be fear of missing out in established jurisdictions, and this is what I believe is absolutely vital, absolutely indispensable for the modernization of regulatory structures in The US and elsewhere. At the moment, you know, there's huge vested interest in the status quo. Nothing happens. It's it's very frustrating, but FOMO will do it. And the other thing that's gonna happen in the next few years is the kind of work that we're doing, the work on mice. If we get as and when we get to this threshold called robust mental rejuvenation, a whole year of extension of life from starting in middle age, then, you know, the conversation is gonna be ridiculously different. We are going to have a full blown, full scale war on aging. Not like the war on cancer, which was you know, it was a great deal, but it was nothing, but it was only a troubling of the budget of the National Cancer Institute. It was imperceptible to the American public. We're gonna have a proper war on aging. And, so, yeah, that will that will change everything. And, honestly, I will feel at that point, my job is done. That, you know, that that that the, that the phones will happen. There will be enough people. Everyone will be working on it. And, of course, I'll do I'll continue to do my bit, but, my main job will be done. When is the mouse reversal expected to to publish? Well, so again, it's not close enough that I can put a firm time frame. It's still pioneering technology, but I do put a 50% probability. At the moment, I'm saying three to four years from now. Okay. Gotcha. Right. With all of these things that I have, obviously, like, risk, you know, you mentioned these early adopters going to this, faraway jurisdictions. So, like, I guess I guess the the kind of rational standpoint would be that if you're, like, older and closer to the, you know, average life expectancy, you would be more riskier. Whereas if you're, like, younger, like me, I'm I'm 30. So I would I would maybe not be an early adopter. I would wait, you know Mhmm. For these things to kind of have more evidence. Yeah. Absolutely right. And, of course, it's not your actual age that matters here. It's your biological age. So I'm 61, but you wouldn't know it to look at my numbers. You know, I'm biologically probably in my forties still. So, again, I'm a bit more conservative than the average 61 year old would be. Right. Yeah. That's kind of important to think about. And what would you know? So right now, I know that also depends on, okay, what are you gonna do until the next fifteen years to to reach that to make it to make sure that you live until that. So those those things, would you think like, you know, diet exercise, some supplements, or what do you think, would you be able to do? When people ask me what when people ask me what I do, you know, I emphasize the, avoidance of the risks of death that do exist now. So, you know, I don't accept seminar invitations to dangerous countries. Mhmm. You know, things like that. Punching. Right. Exactly. I've never seen why people would do those things. But, yeah, I mean, as I said, calorie restriction doesn't really work very well. It doesn't really achieve very much in humans, and therefore, calorie genetics don't either. When it comes to lifestyle and diet and so on, again, you know, you can't really do much. I mean, of course, you can do something. You can avoid shortening your life. But, essentially, over and above, just living the way your mother told you to, and not smoking and not getting seriously overweight and having a reasonably varied diet, you know, there's not a lot. And, for, you know, quality versus quantity comes into it. You know, if you're sacrificing a lot of quality of life to do this or that thing, whether it's because they saw that thing cost a lot of money that you don't have to go there on vacations or whatever, you know, that increases your stress level and stress is actually bad for aging. So, so at the moment, I would say, you know, live a fulfilling life, really, is the most important thing. And, of course, I really always emphasize, do what you can to hasten the arrival of longevity escape velocity. Right. So, you know, people like me, I'm doing a lot. Other scientists can do a lot by, you know, getting into the most impactful areas of science. Wealthy people can help in the obvious way by accelerating the science financially. People like you are helping right now by, you know, educating your audience. Mhmm. And, the more of that happen, better. I always point out advocacy. Everyone can do advocacy. Everyone can talk to their friends, their family, their colleagues, and, you know, raise the quality of thinking and action in this area. Most people say, okay. You know, I can't do anything. I don't have any money. And I always point out that the poorer you are, the more people you know who are wealthier than you. So, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, just spreading the word about this ideas. And the science is, I think, for the average person that mostly can do. But yeah, I mean, yes, super excited to, like for those future studies and the trials. Before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about your work, where can they support the work, or anything of that? Well, of course, go to our website, levf.org. I imagine you'll put it in the show notes. But Yeah. My foundation is called is named after the concept of longevity escape velocity. Lev is longevityescapevelocity,fforfoundation,.org. And, you know, everything that we're doing is there. There's a whole bunch of information about, about why we're doing it and all that. And, of course, there's a nice big friendly donate button. Of course. Yeah. I'll I'll put the link in the show notes. And the last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you adopted sooner? Well, I wish I had adopted sooner. Well, the honest answer is I'm probably too trusting. Mhmm. You know? I I I have, chosen to be rather naive about human nature. Gotcha. Right. Yeah. That can be problematic sometimes. Well, yeah. Well, thanks for coming to the show. I'm, yeah. Really thankful for sharing your, for you sharing your knowledge, and, yeah, looking forward to the future work. Well, thank you, Cali, mate. Yeah. I'll see you around. Bye for now. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.