One day you're gonna wake up and realize, goddamn, I'm old. It's going to be harder to walk up the stairs. You're starting to gain some body fat. There are some wrinkles on your forehead and you notice the first gray hairs in your hair. The truth of the matter is that we're all going to experience aging. No one has escaped it so far. However, you can control the speed of your aging. And in this video, I'm going to outline the main things to focus on to slow down biological aging and maintain a more youthful phenotype. These are the things you need to start doing no matter your age because these processes start to kick in already when you're 25 years old. So make sure you click like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. First, let's talk about aging of the physical body and function. The older people get, the less capable they usually become in terms of lifting something, running around, climbing, flexibility, etcetera. That's because of the age related decline of muscle mass, power strength and v o two max, which all go down by about 10% per decade. These things occur already after your twenties. Let's start with v o two max because it's much more important than muscle mass. V o two max refers to maximum oxygen consumption during exercise, and it's important for cardiovascular health. Having a v o two max above 49 kilogram per minute is linked to up to a four fold lower risk of mortality compared to a v o two max below eighteen milliliters per kilogram per minute. A v o two max below eighteen milliliters per kilogram per minute is the frailty threshold below which you have a hard time walking and taking care of yourself. The average untrained man has a v o two max of thirty five to forty milliliters per kilogram per minute, whereas the average untrained woman, 27 to 31. However, remember that your VO two max declines by about 10 per decade, which means that if you have, let's say, a VO two max of 49 in your twenties or thirties, then by the time you're 70 or 80, it might have declined into the frailty zone if you haven't trained after your twenties. So if you do maintain more regular physical activity and you do train your VO two max all throughout your lifetime, then the higher your VO two max is going to be and the slower the decline in your VO two max is also going to be. So it's better to have a VO two max that's about ten years younger than your chronological age. That's a good, like, estimate to stay ahead of the curve of the VO two max decline. For that, you have to do cardiovascular exercise. Both steady state zone two cardio as well as high intensity interval training work. HIIT is a more time efficient method than zone two, but the gains from zone two are more permanent and lay a bigger foundation to your to max. Generally, it doesn't matter which type of cardio you do. The biggest determinant of your VO2max is just doing more cardio. And the more cardio you do, whether that be zone two or HIT cardio, the higher your VO2max is generally going to be. A 2019 meta analysis of 53 randomized controlled trials found that short intervals less than thirty seconds, low volume less than five minutes, and short term less than four weeks are an effective and time efficient way to increase VA two max. However, they found that to maximize VA two max adaptations, long intervals over two minutes, high volume over fifteen minutes, and moderate to long term over four to twelve weeks were better. So longer intervals are better than shorter intervals, doing more frequent intervals, and the more time you do the intervals, the better it is. Next, let's talk about muscle and strength. This goes down by about ten percent per decade after the age of 30. By the age of 80, you could have lost up to 30 to 50% of your lean tissue. Having low muscle mass is linked to a higher risk of mortality, heart disease, diabetes, frailty, and cognitive decline. Falling and breaking a hip is one of the leading causes of accidental deaths among the elderly. Those with higher amounts of muscle and strength have a lower risk of all cause mortality. We're not talking about becoming a bodybuilder, and obviously, there is no centenarians who have a ton of muscle. But the main idea is that the people who live the longest, they generally have above average muscle mass than the general population. That could be because of their physically active lifestyle or because they're healthier. It doesn't matter how they achieve that muscle mass. It means that having more muscle protects against some of the other ailments and issues that many people die to. So how do you build muscle and strength? The best way to do it is with resistance training. Resistance training has been seen to reverse aging in skeletal muscle. Resistance training can be lifting weights, calisthenics, kettlebells, or anything else that requires you to contract your muscle fibers at near maximum intensity. You can check out my recent video about my own full workout plan for longevity that utilizes both resistance training and VH Max training. Next, let's talk about skin aging. Aging is characterized by a loss of collagen and other compounds such as hyaluronic acid and elastin that makes the skin look more wrinkled, pigmented, and less supple. Not only does it make us look older, but also leaves the skin more vulnerable to certain conditions such as eczema, dermatitis, and melanoma. There's also been an observed link between your facial aging and how long you're going to live. In a 2013 study, people with less facial wrinkles had a higher likelihood of reaching extreme longevity. The offspring of centenarians looked one point four to two years younger than their peers. That could be because a more youthful face and fewer wrinkles are a sign of younger biological age and slower aging. Facial aging has been seen to correlate with higher epigenetic age and increased risk of all cause mortality based on the epigenetic clocks. So looking younger is not only for aesthetics, it also affects your longevity. So what do you do to slow down your facial aging? The biggest contributor to skin aging is the loss of collagen in the skin. Collagen is the most abundant protein in the body, making up 30% of all tissues. Unfortunately, starting already at the age of 20, you lose a bit less than 10% of your skin's collagen content with every decade. That's why taking a collagen supplement is one of the best ways to mitigate against the loss of collagen, and it works. There are many human trials showing that collagen peptides improve skin hydration, reduce wrinkles, and reverse signs of skin aging. A twenty twenty three meta analysis of 26 randomized controlled trials showed that hydrolyzed collagen peptide supplementation significantly improved skin hydration and elasticity. That's why I take about ten grams of collagen peptides every day, and I'm probably gonna do it for the rest of my life. Interestingly, peptides could be the future of longevity supplements. One of the most evidence based peptides for skin aging is copper peptide GHK. Copper is needed for collagen and elastin synthesis as well as collagen uptake into cells. Copper peptide GHK has been found to modulate skin regeneration and wound healing. In diabetic humans, GHK has been seen to speed up skin healing from ulcers by three folds. GHK copper peptide also modulates antioxidant genes that protect against inflammation, UVB radiation, and oxidative stress. So copper peptide GHK helps with collagen synthesis. It helps with skin regeneration, wound healing, and skin elasticity. I've been using the Alatura Gold Serum for over a year. The Gold Serum has GHK copper tripeptide that helps with skin regeneration, pigmentation, and elasticity. There's also other amazing natural food grade ingredients like marine collagen, organic olive oil, plant retinol, Azaxanthin, bee propolis, beeswax, coqutin essential oils, and hemp seed oil, all of which support collagen synthesis and skin health. All Alatura skin care products are made of natural ingredients with no microplastics or hormone disruptors, unlike conventional brands. Their products are also bottled in myron glass, free from xenostrogens and plastics. This makes the gold serum the most unique and powerful skin serum you can use, and I'm personally taking it daily. There are hundreds of positive testimonials and reviews you can check out on the Alator website for some amazing skin transformations. Use code seam for a 20% discount at alitura.com. Next, let's talk about one of the most overlooked aspects of aging, which is cognitive function and brain aging. Normal aging is characterized by a loss of some cognitive function even when you don't have Alzheimer's disease or dementia. Of course, all the healthy lifestyle, exercise, and lifting have a positive effect on brain aging as well. But I'm gonna share with you some key ideas that you probably haven't heard before. One of the key determinants of your brain longevity and resistance to neurodegeneration is the concept of brain reserve and cognitive reserve. Brain reserve refers to the physical brain structure's ability to cope with damage, whereas cognitive reserve describes more resilience of the mind and mental faculties. It's been found that higher cognitive and brain reserve are associated with better cognitive function and with a lower risk of dementia. So instead of just doing bodybuilding, you should also do some brainbuilding. So how do you increase your brain and cognitive reserve? Besides all the healthy lifestyle and dietary habits, education and bilingualism appears to have a big effect. Speaking multiple languages is very good for your brain and cognitive reserve. Having a more cognitively demanding job does it as well. These results haven't seem to be independent of intelligence. Your intelligence has little to do with your cognitive reserve. It's the mere act of mental stimulation that improves cerebral blood flow and works like exercise for the brain. Reading, playing cards, solving puzzles, socializing, learning new skills, they all improve cognitive reserve. To know what's your cognitive reserve, you need to take the cognitive reserve index questionnaire, which measures some demographic data and 20 items from three categories, education, working activity, and leisure time. Neuropsychological assessments are also useful for assessing your cognitive function not only after you get diagnosed with dementia, but also before to establish a baseline for your cognitive function right now. So if you ever get dementia or Alzheimer's later in your life or you are suspected to have it, then if you have ever done the neuropsychological assessment before, then the doctors will have something to compare. Like if you don't have any data before that the doctors don't know what your cognitive reserve like, they don't know what your cognitive function like at a baseline level so they don't have nothing to compare. So they're like, you know, they don't know how fast you're progressing or if it's like, you know, unnormal for your brain. So it's very kind of beneficial to even if you don't have any, you know, symptoms at a very young age already, it's pretty useful to have, okay, a baseline neuropsychological assessment. Last, let's talk about the sex hormones, testosterone and estrogen. These sex hormones, also called steroid hormones, are important for reproduction, fertility, and general health. Maintaining reproductive health is thought to be a sign of slower biological aging and youthfulness. Unfortunately, all the hormones decline with age by about 10% per decade. Healthy men have been seen to be able to maintain higher testosterone levels even into their elderly years. As a result of that, they tend to be healthier with less body fat, they have more muscle, and they're still fertile. One of the biggest predictors of testosterone is BMI or body mass index. It's even more important than smoking or alcohol. Excess body fat converts testosterone into estrogen, which results in low testosterone and high estrogen in men. Even minor obesity can lower testosterone through insulin resistance and visceral fat accumulation, which also causes erectile dysfunction. So metabolic health is one of the most important things for having normal and high testosterone levels. But you don't wanna be too lean either because if you have too little body fat, then that can also disrupt your hormone production. From a dietary perspective, then being too low carb also tends to result in lower testosterone levels, especially if the protein intake is high. A 2022 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials discovered that the moderate protein, less than 35% of total calories, and low carb diets had no effects on testosterone levels. But a high protein diet with over 35% of total calories and a low carb diet decreased testosterone by about a 150 nanograms per deciliter. That is quite interesting and significant, and it certainly reveals the connection between sex hormones and your macronutrients. Having a fat intake below 20% is also linked to lower testosterone, but you don't see any increase in testosterone after 40% of total calories coming from fat. For women, it's a bit more difficult because after menopause, their estrogen levels drop close to zero. This increases the risk of heart disease, osteoporosis, and all cause mortality because estrogen has a lot of cardio protective effects. Menopause occurs usually between the ages of 45 and 55 with everyone getting it at different times. Some factors that contribute to an earlier menopause are smoking and an unhealthy lifestyle, but excess exercise can also do it. Interestingly, moderate alcohol intake seems to delay menopause, probably because of the estrogenic effects of alcohol. As you can see, time is fighting against you. Even in your twenties, you're experiencing some aspects of aging. You just don't notice it yet. The first visible and actual symptoms will occur in your thirties and forties. The biggest lesson here is that you want to start slowing it down as much as possible as soon as possible. Doesn't matter how old you are right now. Even if you're in your forties and fifties and you feel like you've missed a train, then it's never too late to start. And by focusing on these five key aspects that I shared in this video, you're gonna stay ahead of the curve. So I hope you got some valuable information from this. Click the like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like and subscribe. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.