There aren't a lot of obese centenarians. Certainly, the muscle mass, I think, from an aging perspective is more important than doing the cardio, but when you look at the studies, then, the higher cardiorespiratory fitness is associated with a lower risk of mortality than muscle strength and muscle mass. Seam Land, welcome back to the show. I'm, happy to be here. So we were just saying before we press record, it's it's been a while, and we've had you on a couple of times, but it's been it's been a long time. It's great to have you back on, mate. And to to jump into your new book, which I know you're you said you're just finishing up, and, I'm I'm guessing that'll be released at some point this year, and that is the the longevity leap. So I'm really excited about that. So I'm curious, what got you interested in focusing on, aging and longevity in in the first place? Yeah. So I got into health as a thing when I was around 18, I think. So, like, after high school, I I was, preparing to enroll in the military in Estonia, and during that summer I, you know, started to focus a lot on my fitness, wanted wanted to, you know, obviously prepare for the military, but also just, get, like, super fit. I wanted to win, like, one of the titles in the military where you get the physical prepares test, the max scores on all the three tests. Yeah. I didn't win it. At that time, I got, like, I got max scores in push ups and sit ups, but I didn't get the max score in the running test. Funny enough you know we had two years ago we had the military reserve meeting, which is like just you know every every few years they bring back the people to memorize things, and, their ID is got the max scores. So I've gotten over ten years, I've gotten fitter, which is good. Great. But, yeah, I pretty much but pretty much I got interested in fitness and wanted to optimize it, did a lot of exercise and stuff like that, you know, focused on a lot of like basics of nutrition. After the military, I went to the uni and started learning anthropology, which, which is something I was interested because of being interested in humans, humans as a species overall. You know, I was interested in a lot of, like, ancient civilizations and hunter gatherers and, those kind of things. And, I just wanted to, yeah, like, learn about humans. It was more of like a I didn't have a plan to become an anthropologist or, like, you know, ethnographer, which most anthropologists would do. They would write ethnographies about different people, but I would, do it as a way to just, like, you know, self development for myself and to learn about things. There I just also was, you know, advancing my knowledge in health and nutrition as well. I continued exercising, learned about different ways of dieting, intermittent fasting, and those kind of things, and at at one point I wanted to focus more on longevity because, like, my you know, grandfather died, to a colorectal cancer when he was 36 years old, which is, you know, super young. And I wasn't born then. My mother was, like, eight years old or something. So, yeah, it was obviously something that I didn't wanna, like, repeat in my family lineage. And, the biggest or the most important part for any kind of chronic disease whether that be heart disease, neurodegeneration, cancer and those kind of things is, you know, prevent prevention and living a healthy lifestyle. Of course there's some genetic aspects as well but they can all be like you know prevented with the proper lifestyle so that's why I wanted to you know obviously take care of my own longevity and started to learn about those things as well of how can I make sure that I don't die prematurely, myself because I don't have, like, you know, good longevity genetics? No one in my family I don't know of anyone who has lived over the age of 80, so they're all mostly dying in their seventies, which, you know, I'm hoping I can, like, break at some point this curse kind of. And, another reason why I, you know, specifically wanted to create content about longevity and write books about it and really go into it was also because of the anthropological side. So, obviously aging and longevity is something humans have been thinking about since our, you know, throughout our history ever since we were hunter gatherers we've been thinking about death and living a long time and stuff like that. So it's just as an anthropologist I'm also interested in the the like philosophical and anthropological side of longevity, of you know figuring out one of the hardest problems humans have been thinking about throughout our history. And, you know, when we're talking about obesity or heart disease even and other, like, chronic diseases, then we pretty much know, you know, what needs to be done and we have, like, pretty reliable medicines as well to postpone those diseases, you know, like the lifestyle adjustments that need to be made, you know, and and with those chronic diseases, it's mostly about, like, adherence and, sticking to the routines. But with longevity and aging, we don't have, you know, the complete picture yet. We don't we haven't, like, you know, repeatedly extended lifespan even in, like, animal models and not to mention humans, and it's, of course, much harder to do it in humans as well. And I'm just, yeah, for myself doing it for my own longevity to, you know, improve my own health and the chances of living longer, and, as a human human specimen kind of, I'm doing it as a, you know, quest of, you know, science or anthropology as well. I like it, man. I like it. Great great story in on to in getting the understanding of why you're so passionate about it. What what I like is if you think about we live in a very toxic environment, very toxic world, and, you know, there's a lot out there on just trying to be healthy. Right? How do you just stay healthy with all these toxins going around and, you know, detoxing and eating well. But I like when we're thinking about longevity and aging gracefully. It's like we're playing to win. It's like, oh, yeah. I get all that. That's all there, but I'm gonna tackle that, and, also, I'm aiming to last a 100 plus. So I I like that mindset. Your book is called The Longevity Leap. What what is The Longevity Leap? Yeah. So The Longevity Leap, the title is inspired by a study where they discussed that currently there's like a ten year gap between the average lifespan or life expectancy in the world and health adjusted life expectancy, which is like the life free from these chronic diseases. So the average age at which a person gets a comorbidity like hypertension, heart disease, or cancer, or something else is like 63. And the average global life expectancy in 2020 at least was 73 Mhmm. Point three years. So it's, you know, slightly increasing every year, but most of it is because of the reduction in infant mortality in developed or developing countries and access to better health care and stuff like that. So it's not like humans are exponentially living longer, it's just that, you know, the average life expectancy is calculated. Yeah. It's like an average across the entire population and across the entire globe. So the developing countries are dragging the average life expectancy down, not in a bad way, but, you know, it's it's the unfortunate situation whereas, you know, the average life expectancy in countries like South Korea or Japan and Spain, Italy, Hong Kong, Monaco, those have a average life expectancy over 80. So, you know, and but the but the study mentioned that, you know, there's this gap, ten year gap between the health span, which is the lifespan free of disease and the actual maximum or the average of life expectancy. So the, title of the book or the idea is to bridge that gap to extend the health span because, you know, once you do that you not only have better quality life, you have more years, free from disease that reduce your quality of life, but also in so doing, you delay the other chronic diseases like heart disease and neurogeneration, and in so doing, you, like, add healthy years to your life as well because, you know, what's what really is one of the biggest determining factors to how long an average person lives is when do they get a particular chronic disease like heart disease or kidney disease or Alzheimer's or cancer. And what they find with centenarians is that there's some people who live over 100 years old, they they're not like immune to these diseases. They get the same diseases, but they just get heart disease or cancer ten years later or twenty years later than the average person. So they're just either genetically luckier that, they get a disease slightly later or they have some other, like, environmental factors like, yeah, they live on an island, in Sardinia or something that that is very natural environment, or they do, like, follow some healthy lifestyle habits as well. You know, what what you find from the centenarian studies is that they don't have some sort of a super optimized biohacker health routine. They're they actually have like a very, you know, decent of a health routine. Like they don't they don't drink a bunch of alcohol, but they do drink some alcohol. They, eat mostly whole foods, but not like a very, you know, pristine diet. They eat some, let's say, sweets as well every once in a while. They don't have a lot of, like, processed food like, donuts and those kind of things, but they do still, you know, they're not like a very they don't have, like, some sort of a vegan diet or grass fed diet. Well, of course, maybe they do have grass fed meat, but, the point is that they don't have some sort of a very, like, you know, they don't have any of these routines that a lot of the longevity people in the space, have. But they do have good genetics apparently, and they do have favorable environmental factors, and they do have things like community and low stress and, physical activity in their life. They don't go to the gym, but that they do maintain regular physical activity like walking up and down the hills and, walking around everywhere, spending time in nature and outside, and those kind of things. So taking a longevity leap means bridging the gap between your health span and lifespan so that you have more quality years in your life, but in so doing you also take a leap forward with your average life expectancy that you add extra years to your life as well, which is, you know, possible because, you delay the onset of these chronic diseases. So that's the, like, main aim of the book or the main knowledge in the book is centered around, okay, how do we prevent the top killers in the world, which are, you know, heart disease, neurodegeneration, kidney disease, diabetes in developing or developed countries. In developing countries, they have more these infectious diseases, but they start to catch up as well with the advancements in health care in those, countries. Yeah. I like what you're saying, and, you know, I think we all want to live a long time. And, actually, when we live a long time, we just wanna be, you know, unwell right at the very end versus what's going on now. You know, obviously, the average is a ten year gap, but if you go to some of the more westernized countries like The US, I'm sure it's a lot longer, right, a lot wider. And I liked what you said. If we can get as far as we can until, you know, the health span fails, that is a kind of proxy to live longer, right, and to and to have a a longer life. Have you, have you come across a a lady called Mary Ruddock and her work? Have you heard of Mary? No. She is, she's a practitioner that she's always going all over the world. She's been on the show a couple of times, but she's lived in Ikaria in Greece, and she studied all of these blue zones. And it's fascinating when she gives her interpretation of what's going on. She talks about how they eat, like, nose to tail. They eat all of the animal. Nothing goes to waste. There's a real sense of community, within, you know, the the the centenarians are still doing things. They still have purpose. They still get up and have to do stuff. So it was it was fascinating fascinating getting her take, and it aligns with what you're saying around, yes, diet's important, but there's so many other factors, community. It's not necessarily about eating the the cleanest diets. Right? There's so many different factors. There's genetics. There's overall pollution. But, yeah, I would love to go to one of these blue zones that because I know a lot of them technically that I think I I read there's only really one left now, technically, but there's obviously little bubbles of communities in those areas. But, yeah, it's it's fascinating, isn't it, to see why those individuals are, you know, living so long, right, and way over a 100 years old. I think it's fascinating stuff. Mhmm. So you obviously have the book coming out, and, we're looking forward to that dropping. And, I want to jump into now your four step routine that you've developed to maximise longevity, to maximise your health span. And, you know, we'd love to get your take on how you do that. So the first one here is you talk about maintaining optimal body composition. Why why is that important? Yeah. So the fact of the matter is that there aren't a lot of obese centenarians or there's not a lot of, you know, overweight people living a very long time and, obesity and even having the wrong type of extra body fat which is the visceral fat, then that does, you know, contribute to pretty much all the chronic diseases as well. It's one of the main lifestyle related issues to heart disease, diabetes, kidney disease, cancer and neurogeneration. So, yeah, even, like, metabolically healthy obesity, which is has been used around over the past few years is not really a thing because the, the higher your BMI then generally all the components of metabolic syndrome and metabolic dysfunction also increase with the increase in BMI. So the more overweight you are generally then, the worse your biomarkers are going to be. Of course, there are some exceptions. Some people develop insulin resistance and diabetes at a lower BMI compared to others is called the body fat set point, but, yeah, like, there's just no health benefits to having excess or, you know, very large amounts of excess, body fat. You know, the the only difference is that there's a difference between men and women. So, women appear to get away with a lot of things that men can't get away with. That's why ninety percent of centenarians are women and, you know, some scientists think that it's maybe related to estrogen, it might be related to other these sex hormones that women have and it could also be related to that, you know, men are more they take more risky behavior, they take or they follow on healthier habits and those kind of things as well. But even physiologically, there are some, like, sex hormone differences that, can skew the distribution of centenarians, making the women on average live like, you know, five to ten years longer than men on average even before centenarian hood. And, if you're a woman and your BMI is like, you know, thirty five, then even then you you don't see like a very significant increase in risk. Whereas if you're a man and you're overweight, then, the risk pretty much increases linearly with increasing body fat percentages. So as a man, you pretty have if you wanna become a centenarian, then you pretty much have to have a very healthy lifestyle and you have to have a very good, you know, body composition and, healthy biomarkers, pretty much, as long as possible. And, obesity and being overweight are one of the, you know, let's say, contributors to bad composition bad body composition. Mhmm. The other part of body composition is also muscle mass and lean tissue. So, low amounts of muscle mass is also a risk factor for a lot of different chronic diseases. Sarcopenia is this medical condition where you are with low muscle strength, low muscle mass, and with poor physical performance. So, that increases your risk of all cause mortality by up to, like, a hundred percent in the elderly people. So if you're an older person, you don't have muscle strength and muscle mass, then you're very frail and, you're at a higher risk of, like, hip fractures and other, like, falling down, and, you know, one of the biggest causes of death among the elderly is falling down and the subsequent consequences that they experience from that. Muscle mass is also beneficial for protecting against obesity in some way, like, if you have more muscle mass, then your metabolic rest your resting metabolic rate is gonna be higher, it's gonna be easier for you to burn calories and stay leaner, and it also is a very large glucose disposal vessel in that sense because if you have more muscle tissue, then your body's better able to metabolize glucose without causing insulin resistance or without leading to insulin resistance and poor metabolic health. So yeah muscle mass and and body fat they both contribute to optimal body composition, you know, bone density is also there but if you have more muscle then you generally have to you will have generally higher bone density as well. So the goal is to have, you know, higher muscle mass, lower body fat and higher bone density. There's obviously a range to that. You don't need to be elite in terms of, muscle mass. Like, you know, there's definitely something, or there's definitely too much muscle mass that can also have negative side effects or, you know, diminishing returns. The same with body fat percentage if you're too lean then that can have diminishing returns especially if you're like in the elderly group. So, being too skinny or malnourished also increases risk of frailty in the elderly people. So if you're a young person then it's better to have, you know, pretty low amounts of body fat and more muscle mass, and if you're older then having slightly more body fat is protective because it protects against, you know, falls and frailty, but ideally you still want to have relatively speaking higher amounts of muscle mass for your age group, like you wanna have slightly more or slightly above average for your age group, when it comes to muscle mass. And there are like clinical, like this criteria as well for sarcopenia, which, you know, like I said low muscle mass and low muscle strength and poor physical performance. For the muscle mass you can do, you know, you would need to do like a DEXA scan, which is the gold standard for measuring body composition. It's gonna tell you your bone density, muscle mass, and body fat percentage, and a DEXA scan calculates your appendicular lean mass, and then if your appendicular lean mass index, which is the appendicular lean mass divided by the square of your height, then if that for men is below seven then that's categorized as sarcopenia and five point five is for women. So we want to be above that. And you know for me 30 years old, my appendicular lean mass last time I measured it was eight point nine, which put me into the ninetieth or which put me in like the nine more than ninety percent of people of my age group. So I'm in like pretty higher end and I want to like maintain it. So like around eight would be a ninety percentile for the age of let's say, 70 or, 75 or 80 even, because you do see a decline in muscle mass, with age because of the, like, natural aging process and also like this worsening of the ability to build muscle or maintain it. So that's why it's important to stay ahead of the curve in terms of your muscle mass and muscle strength because all of these things go down with age. Your muscle mass goes down with age by about 10% per decade, Muscle strength goes about down by about 10% per decade. Your max goes down and, you know, all those things go down with age. So you never wanna play catch up, you know, when when you see that, oh, I'm actually pretty low on this, borderline sarcopenia, then it's, you know, actually pretty or depends on what your age is. Like if you find that you have sarcopenia in your thirties then you have still plenty of time to turn it around. If you're in your seventies and eighties and you find, in the sarcopenia range then, you know, your life is gonna be much more difficult, and, your risk of mortality is also much higher because of that. Got it. So, basically, we need to be you know, shed the fat, build the muscle, and that that's a key indicator of of longevity, which I which I like. Yeah. And one of the, like, contrapoints a lot of people bring out is that, hey. You know, the centenarians, none of them lifts. They I've never seen a muscular centenarian before, which is true, but that's not what we're talking about. So if you look at a group of people, you have 10 people, and then you see, and then you do a DXA scan on all of them, then you find out okay, the people who are in the ninetieth percentile of muscle mass, the ones who have the most muscle mass, they're generally going and then they follow them up for you know multiple years, then you see that okay, the ones who had the most muscle generally had the lowest risk of mortality as well. So it's not that building muscle per se is what like, is not what is the kind of key to this. The key is that the people who have slightly more muscle generally have lower rates of mortality and it doesn't matter how they achieve that, you're not going to able to like replicate it to the same way that they do, but you can the only thing that you can do is that okay, I'm trying to fit myself into that same paradigm of body composition and other biomarkers because that what apparently works through like almost like natural selection, like okay you see what kind of traits and what kind of qualities, what kind of markers, what ranges of markers are linked to the lowest mortality, and then you try to emulate it so that you would fit into the same category as well hopefully. So it's, kind of like placing your bets on the most reasonable and most likely beneficial outcome. Yeah. So, Rick, really, I think about if you're, you know, if you are a sense scenario in the blue zones, you'll just be active. You'll be moving. You'll be outdoors lifting stuff, and that will be maintaining muscle mass, right, and Right. Keeping fat off. So, yeah, it's right. They're not lifting in the gym. They're not, like, trying to bulk or anything like that, but they are doing things to maintain, low fat composition and and good and good muscle as well. Yeah. Okay. So next up, you talk about calorie restriction. So we've we've heard of this before, intermittent fasting. And, you know, I've seen there's there's a definite correlation between, you know, the amount of calories you eat and how long, that you live. So how do you implement this in in what you do, and how can calorie restriction help us improve our our lifespan or health span rather? Yeah. So the idea of calorie restriction improving longevity and lifespan comes mostly from animal studies is one of the most replicated methods of extending lifespan in animals, in different animals, mice, rats, yeasts, monkeys even. Mhmm. And, there are, you know, a lot of mechanisms as well that can explain this phenomenon. Obviously in humans the story is a lot more complicated. We don't have long term data about calorie restriction extending extending human lifespan because it would be like pretty impossible to do that kind of a study, a lifelong study because, you know, humans live very long and it's very difficult to track those kind of things or control for all the variables whereas in animal studies or these lab animals, you can control exactly how many calories and what movement they do and those kind of things. But, you know, still regardless in animal studies calorie restriction does extend, lifespan not always but, you know, pretty consistently. And, in humans we do have, like, a few short term randomized control trials lasting, like, two years. They're called, like, the calorie, trials done by the National Institute of Aging. And they have found that if they tell, okay, the randomized people into these groups, one of them is, prescribed one of the groups is prescribed to be on a calorie deficit of about 25%, for the next two years, and the other is like a more controlled group. What they find is that after those two years, first of all, none of the people in the calorie restriction group are able to actually adhere to the calorie deficit, so they end up eating around only like 15% calorie deficit or 10% something that depends on the person. So they're not able to adhere to it because it's pretty hard to eat 25% fewer calories for the rest of their life. And for the record, like, those people aren't actually counting their calories, they're not measuring their food and those kind of things. So you don't necessarily know if they actually were in a calorie deficit. But regardless, that's the best we got in terms of doing long term, randomized controlled trials in humans. And but what you do find is that even even then the people who do the calorie restriction or who who are said to do it, those people after those two years generally have slightly lower body weight, slightly better card and metabolic risk factors like blood pressure, blood sugar, lipids, inflammation, and visceral fat, and those kind of things. So their their health does improve if you do tell them to eat slightly less calories, even if that what they adhere to is only 15%. You know, if they were to adhere to the 25% precisely then the results could be better, but you know we don't have the we don't have the exact control over everything they do. But, in human trials it does appear that calorie restriction does improve markers of health, it improves body body composition through the perspective of body fat loss and weight loss, not necessarily muscle gain, as a, like, soul intervention, but you do see improvements in health. And as of now, it's, you know, hard to say that or it's there's no evidence that eating 25% fewer calories is going to extend your lifespan in humans, but it's certainly what it does do is reduce the risk of chronic diseases because your metabolic health and your biomarkers improve. So, you know, there's a lot of things that go into the development of diabetes and heart disease, but if you're not overweight and your, you know, biomarkers like lipids, triglycerides, blood pressure, blood sugar, insulin, those things are better and improving then your risk of the chronic diseases also goes down. So it's just a method of, like, taking the leap kind of from a dietary perspective that you're slowing down the development of this chronic diseases slightly, and I guess, yeah, like the issue here is also that it depends on your age, so if you're someone who is like again like 70s or 80s then your risk of malnutrition and frailty I think outweighs all of the benefits of the calorie restriction. So if you're older person, you're already sarcopenic, you have low muscle tone, low bone density, then you're already probably doing calorie restriction because you're suffering the consequences of excess calorie restriction by having low muscle mass and in that scenario it's actually important to eat more, like, to prevent further, degradation and further frailty. So it depends what age you're at, you know, the main idea is to just not become obese and, you know, you can achieve that problem with like the maintenance calories, you don't necessarily need to be in a calorie deficit, maybe you can achieve it by just being in a calorie maintenance, but if you were to also like believe in the idea that some of the mechanisms that calorie restriction works by also has longevity benefits then, yeah, like just being in some sort of, you know, lower body fat state could have some longevity benefits as well, but there's no evidence that. The only thing right now is that calorie restriction is going to reduce your risk of becoming overweight and developing these other chronic diseases. Yeah. There's so many variables to it. Right? As you said, you know, what's your age, gender. There's always different elements to calorie restriction. Right? But for the average person, young person, relatively healthy, interested in health, and longevity, what are some general strategy strategies that they can implement? And, also, what what do you implement yourself in regards to calorie restriction and, again, trying to keep this longevity, narrative throughout what you do with your your health regimes? Yeah. So I do eat, like, a lower calorie diet. My metabolic rate is pretty high, but I'm still, you know, obviously staying lean year round, which would require me to not overeat calories because if I were to overeat calories all the time, then I would just gain body fat and, you know, if you don't have abs then you probably are eating slightly more calories than your body requires. And, what I do is, you know, obviously it's important to keep exercising and keep doing resistance training to build muscle tissue and what my, yeah, like, let's say goal post or what my anchor for this is, yeah, I'm just looking at my body composition. Am I starting to get to overrate? Am I starting to is my waist circumference increasing? Is my body fat percentage increasing? And then I'm just adjusting my color intake based on that. On an everyday basis I'm just eating like according to my energy requirements, so if I exercise then I'm just eating more calories, if I don't exercise then I'm eating less calories because I'm burning fewer calories as well, So yeah, it just comes down to my energy expenditure and what my goals are. Some parts of the year I am trying to quote unquote bulk and try to add more muscle because it's gonna be virtually impossible to do it in a calorie deficit all the time unless you're overweight or obese, but if you're already lean and you wanna add a bit more muscle tissue, then you do need to be in a calorie surplus to a certain extent and eat sufficient amounts of protein, so like maybe some parts of the year, maybe like a few weeks or a month or two, I am trying to add a little bit of mass muscle mass, but at other times, I'm pretty much on maintenance and eating according to my, like, exercise, demands, if that makes sense. Yeah. Do you do a restricted feeding window? So do you do intermittent fasting? Yeah. I do a more narrower intermittent fasting window, and, you know, there's different in the book, I talk about fasting as well. It's not superior to calorie restriction or a lot of the health benefits of intermittent fasting come from the calorie restriction. So, you can't, like, neglect the calorie intake when you are doing intermittent fasting and, you know, calorie restriction apparently is the key variable in the studies where intermittent fasting extends lifespan in animals as well. So without calorie restriction or without staying lean and staying in a good body composition, the intermittent fasting wouldn't have life extension effects. You might mitigate some of the harm, but, you know, you need to stay normal with your calorie intake as well when you are doing intermittent fasting. And Mhmm. You know, there's many opinions about what's the best window. Doesn't really matter. It's more of like a tool to adhere to the calorie, deficit. So you use the, you know, but the fasting window to, okay, I'm gonna eat only in these hours and at that time so that my diet is more successful and easier to adhere to. So, for me it's not hard to be in a calorie deficit, but I'm doing the inward fasting because it's also, like, helpful from a productivity side for me. Mhmm. So I'll just in the morning, I'm not gonna eat anything until, like, 11AM, then I'll have a protein shake before my workout, I'll drink the protein shake, maybe a piece of fruit before the workout, and then I'll go to the gym a few hours after the gym I'll, have my dinner, and that's pretty much it. Yeah. That's how I do it. Like you can also, you know, do it in other ways. You can do it with three meals a day. You know, what I what I do think is that like a good rule of thumb also is to just not eat immediately after waking up and not eat immediately before bed. So if you do that already, then you achieve pretty much most of the benefits from inward fasting. So you don't need to do any like one meal a day or you don't need to do the Warrior Diet or anything like that. It's, it's just, you know, from a circadian perspective, you do want to, like, narrow your eating window slightly, but you don't need to take it to, like, a very tight window. So, like, the smaller the window is, the more benefits. There's there's nothing like that. You don't get more benefits by having a smaller, window because the calories is what matters, more. Yeah. I actually I just came off doing a forty eight hour fast. And what was really interesting, day one's always a bit tough. Right? You think, oh, you kinda miss food, and it's the you can't it's the emotional attachment, I find. And the second day is always super easy. And I actually yesterday, I had two or three different podcasts either being interviewed myself or interviewing, and I was just on fire. Like, my brain was just because, again, my I I checked my ketones. It was, like, 3.5. Mhmm. And I was like so I was just I was just in another zone. It was so good. But, again, it you know, to get to that level of ketosis, you've gotta be fasting for a while. So, yeah, loads of benefits of of intermittent fasting or prolonged fasting, including, as you said, the cognitive benefits, for sure. Yeah. But, with the extended fasting, yeah, there's no evidence that doing three, you know, five, seven, ten day fasts would extend your lifespan. We don't we don't have that even in animals. So, yeah, it's, you know, it's not definitely not something that is needed to do. But if you like it then, you know, there are obviously some benefits. You lose a lot of weight. You might get some inflammation down and those kind of things. If you are an older person then obviously it's not a good idea to do it because you're gonna lose a lot of muscle and increase the risk of frailty, but if you're young then you can yeah definitely get away with it and can be a you know if you don't like to be in a calorie deficit all the time you can, yeah, just do once a week. You do a forty eight hour fast, then that puts you into a pretty steep calorie deficit for the week. So it's not the day of the calorie deficit matters. You know, the calorie deficit matters over the course of weeks and the months and the use. Yeah. No. I I did it half for a challenge, and, you know, I'd like to do at least a twenty four hour fast at least once a month. And I thought, you know what? I'll go two days. And it was it was tough, you know, but I'm glad I got through it. And, it was good to refeed. Okay. So the next one is is around the foods that you eat. And, obviously, we know things like ultra processed food isn't isn't great. But tell us tell us about your thoughts on, you know, extending longevity. What food should we focus on? What food should we avoid? Serving sizes, all of that. What were your recommendations there? Yeah. So food is something that, like we talked earlier, many people think that it's the thing, for longevity based on the blue zones, and I think you know, animal studies and those kind of things as well is that the food obviously matters a lot in determining your biomarkers and health status. There are some diets that improve your biomarker or are more likely to improve your biomarkers than others. There are, like, some, like, key aspects of nutrition that you need to hit, like your micronutrients and and sufficient amount of protein and essential fatty acids and those kind of things. But other than that, there's no, like, gold standard diet for longevity. If you look at the people who live over the over a hundred a hundred years, they'll, you know, they'll eat ice cream every night, they'll smoke, they'll eat chocolate, those kind of things. So it's not that food doesn't matter, it's just that food has less of an impact than the good body composition and having the biomarkers. So food is just a means to an end of having the good body composition and good micronutrient status and and, good biomarkers, like the ones we talked about, inflammation, blood sugar, lipids, blood pressure, those kind of things. And some diets help you to achieve it better, than others. So if you eat only Twinkies and donuts, then yes, over the course of some time, eventually over the course of decades probably you will have slightly less muscle because you're not getting enough protein, you might have slightly extra body fat because you're more likely to eat more calories versus if you're eating more whole foods diet that has sufficient amounts of protein and, other foods then you're more likely to have a good body composition and more likely to have good biomarkers, but it's, you know, you can only diet yourself to longevity, you also need to have the other aspects as well like exercise and sunlight exposure, sleep and those kind of things. With that being said, okay, what are the foods that I do think are important? So first of all, like you said, you know, having more less ultra processed food diet is generally healthier. So but ultra processed doesn't mean that all, like ultra processed foods are bad. Some processed foods are actually associated with better health outcomes, like, you know, olive oil is processed, some dairy foods are processed. So it's not that the processing itself is bad, it's just how you do it and, you know, what's the final outcome in humans. So if you process foods like refined carbohydrates and make donuts and those kind of things, then, generally, that's going to be associated with worse outcomes compared to, processing things like olive oil or whatever other healthy processed food there is. But as a rule of thumb, it's beneficial to focus on whole foods, kind of single ingredient foods, that's gonna make it much easier, but, it doesn't mean that you can't have some, let's say, less optimal foods there. So like I said, there's the centenarians and, you know, most people don't have this pristine, biohacker healthy diet. So to say, I think, you know, if you're getting you have to also keep in mind the stress part, if you're, like, super stressed out about the diet, you're worried about all the different ingredients, then that mental stress can actually do more harm than than avoiding the whatever ingredient it is. And you know if at Mediterranean countries they drink wine, they stay up late, like if you go to Sicily or something they all all the locals they actually come out at like 9PM and walk the pier and walk around under a blue light. They eat the sweets, whatever it is, but they still have a pretty high life expectancy compared to The US or some other developed countries. So there's some things that are apparently more important or there are some things that might help you to get away with the suboptimal diet, which I think are, like, you know, movement, walking, social connection, stress free lifestyle, sleeping enough, and those kind of things. Yeah. Now to answer your question, finally, what are the good foods? I think if you wanna, like, if you wanna be safe, on the safe side, then based on the research, then, like, the Mediterranean diet is generally associated with, you know, healthier outcomes pretty repeatedly. And, you know, what it is is just eating, fruits, vegetables, legumes, beans, fish, some meat, eggs, dairy, and, moderate amounts of, wine and those kind of things. So that's that's pretty much I think the most evidence based healthier diet out there. Of course you can adjust this slightly, you can have more animal based, more plant based, whatever, more dairy based, whatever it is, but that's kind of the main kind of framework. And some of the controversy is that Mediterranean people they don't follow that diet like they're actually eating a lot of pork or whatever. Well, of course, the Mediterranean region is very large. You have millions of people there, several countries, of course, they eat differently in different regions. So what your grandma in Sicily ate is not, you know, of course, you know, it might be beneficial from your genetic standpoint, but you have to realize that that might not apply apply to the entire population, and there's also different other variables that play there. And but the the most of the studies are done on the clinical Mediterranean diet, which, actually has, you know, these specific food recommendations and quantities and how much should you moderate to these other foods and those kind of things. So if you wanna really, you know, minimize your risk of heart disease mostly and neuro degeneration, then the clinical Mediterranean diet is the most of it and spaced out of, all of them. And but, of course, that's not it might not be the only one, you know. The most important part is, yeah, that you track your blood work and maintain a good body composition. I think that's the most, Yeah. That's the way that's the magic through which the diet works, by keeping your body composition, good and, keeping your biomarkers also, good. Yeah. What's interesting is all all of these different variables, they all interlink. Right? And, yeah, diet can be really confusing. And and there's there's there's diets for every day of the week nowadays, but we all know the Mediterranean diet. And clearly, off based off the data, it sounds like it's something that, you know, if we're if we're aiming for that longevity piece, sounds like it's it's something to to aim towards. The last points that you've got on your four steps is physical exercise. So, again, we kinda know this. Right? We understand we need to to to get moving. But how does that relate to longevity? And, again, what specific things would you recommend people do, in order to maintain or to have a good physical exercise routine to extend longevity? Yeah. So exercise, you know, we've talked already. It's pretty important. You know, the longest leading people, they don't go to the gym. They don't do marathons and those kind of things. So you can definitely do too much exercise as well, but you do need to maintain some aspect of physical movement for the rest of your life, you know, whether that be walking, gardening, hiking, doing some sort of physical movement, and maintaining, yeah, the kind of physical robustness because, you can't maintain sufficient amount of muscle mass with diet alone. You need to have the stimulus as well that signals the muscles and your bones that, hey, you need to grow, to maintain higher higher muscle mass and bone density. So once you stop that, then, that's where your speed of aging also increases because of your becoming more frail and losing like the functional functionality over time. So that's why, you know, the biggest reason why you should exercise is that you should you wanna maintain just the ability to move in your later years and to maintain, you know, the muscle strength and they do find that if you have low grip strength then even like decades later you can predict how well are you able to get off a chair or put on clothes. If you have low grip strength in your forties then you're gonna have like two to three times more difficulty or you're more likely to two to three times more likely to experience difficulty putting on clothes. So, it's just a reflection of how functional is your body and with age that unfortunately goes down. So the only way to do that unless you are living in a like a island and you grow your your food and doing physical labor, pretty regularly unless you do that, then you do need to, like, emulate it somehow, you know, going to the gym and doing some cardio and those kind of things. If you are living in a very physical environment or you you have a very physical lifestyle, then, of course, the requirement for actual recreational exercise is much lower. But, yeah, you need to emulate certainly the muscle mass, I think, from an aging perspective is more important than doing the cardio. But when you look at the studies, then the higher cardiorespiratory fitness is associated with a lower risk of mortality than muscle strength and muscle mass. So if you looked at, if you were to put it on a tier list, then at the most top, the most important thing, or the most effective, the thing that gives you the biggest results in reducing mortality risk is cardiorespiratory fitness, so that's cardio. Then the second one would be muscle strength, so the actual functionality of your muscles, and the third one would be muscle mass. So the amount of muscle mass is, the least important out of the three. And, you can, you know, for the for the muscle mass and muscle strength, you the best way to do increase those is to do some form of resistance training. It doesn't have to be any particular form of resistance training. It doesn't have to be bodybuilding or powerlifting. It can be calisthenics even. Yoga is a form of resistance training, but it's probably not intense enough over the long term. So doing some form of resistance training, you know, at least a few times a week is enough and recommended for healthy, aging. Cardio respiratory fitness, you can train with low intensity endurance cardio or hit intervals as well. What they do find is that, like, hit in the short term gives more results in terms of increasing cardiovascular fitness and VO2 max, But, the adaptations tend to be more permanent, so you would need to, like, keep doing the intervals to maintain that. Whereas with low intensity cardio, the VO two max adaptations are more more permanent. When you say when you say low intensity cardio, do you mean walking? Like, I think low grade a lot of these centenarians, they'll just walk a lot. They'll just walk around the hills, etcetera. Does that what you mean by the the low grade? Well, walking isn't necessarily cardio, so there's different aerobic zones, zone one to five. Zone one is, like, max out sprinting, and zone one is, yeah, walking and slight incline, but not like mountaineering. Zone two would be, yeah, like jogging and, perhaps, yeah, mountain mountaineering to a certain extent, and zone three and four are, you know, somewhere into it in between there. So zone one, you know, you would have to do a lot of it to get a sufficient response. You would probably have to do like several hours a day to you can probably certainly maintain a good baseline with that by just staying physically active, but if you want to increase your VR to max more or faster, then doing zone two is what lays the foundation to your cardiovascular fitness and gives the most long term adaptations as well. Whereas with HIIT, you're getting faster results and in a more time efficient manner, but, the the adaptations tend to be less permanent as well. You know, I I think you should, you know, everyone should do a mix of both. Mhmm. You know, at least once a week of some interval workout and, you know, at least once a week, some zone two cardio as well. If you wanna really optimize it, then the protocol would be, like, three times a week for resistance training, thirty to forty five minutes each workout, and one interval workout, I can share what's the best protocol shortly, but one interval workout per week and then two zone two cardio sessions per week for like forty five to sixty minutes, you know, generally like the more moderate physical activity you do the better it is. So moderate physical activities is 40 to 60% of your maximum heart rate. So in last year 2023 they did a pretty large, like a systematic review of the recent studies on exercise and cardiovascular disease cardiovascular disease risk and mortality, and they found that the benefits of vigorous intensity exercise like hit cardio and resistance training, the benefits of that peaked around a hundred and forty minutes per week, whereas the benefits of moderate intensity exercise, you know, the more you did it, the lower the risk was. So you could even do nine hundred, a thousand minutes of moderate intensity exercise per week and the lower the risk, went. So, you know, the more of this hiking, walking, zone two cardio you do, then apparent based on data, the the lower the risk of heart disease and the the lower the risk of all cause mortality as well. Whereas with, vigorous intensity or high intensity exercise, if you do more than one hundred and sixty minutes, then the benefits start to go away. So you start to see this u shaped or a j shaped curve where not enough exercise or not enough vigorous exercise increases the risk, but after a certain point, you start to get negative gains or you start to reduce the results, the benefits. Gotcha. Okay. Well, again, we we kinda know physical exercise is important. And, yeah, it's it's great to get that guidance on, really, the parameters of of how we wanna do it. The last thing I wanna finish on, Seem, and this is one of my my favorite things today. Why? Because it's great for health. It's good for detoxing. But I wanna see if there's a correlation between doing this and longevity, and that is using the sauna. I know you're a big fan of sauna ring. Is there a connection between people regularly being I I've seen that there was a recent study, around people in Finland are, you know, the happiest in the world and that they they sauna a lot. But I wonder if there's a connection with longevity. So is there is there any connection there from your work and your research around sauna use and longevity? Yeah. So there is quite a lot of epidemiological studies from Finland finding that people who take the sauna more frequently have lower heart disease, lower dementia, lower Alzheimer's, and lower all cause mortality as well. So the maximum risk reduction is seen with four or more times per week. And, the, like, I guess the counterargument to that would be that it's epidemiological studies and the people who are able to go to the sauna that often and who can afford it, they're like wealthier people and, you know, the reason they live longer and have less of these diseases is because they're rich. But, you know, the the issue here is that the studies are done in Finland and Finnish or Finland is a massive sauna country, it's part of the cultural identity like the population in Finland is 5,500,000, but there are three three million saunas in the in in Finland. So it's almost everyone pretty much has access to the sauna. There's, you know, every gym has a sauna, almost every almost office building and public saunas everywhere, free free saunas as well. So, there is access to sauna pretty much across all socioeconomic status, and so it's a it's a special place to find those results because, you know, yes, in America, if you have a sauna then first of all you probably think that it's good for you and second of all you can afford it because there's pretty much no public saunas in, America. So, you know, that's that's, that because it's because it's done in Finland, I think it's a pretty, I think it certainly is more stronger evidence that there is some causal relationship, between that. And what they actually recently found as well was that the frequent sauna use was able to offset some of the harm of low socioeconomic status on the risk of mortality. So usually people who have lower socioeconomic status, they have a higher mortality risk because of, you know, not being able to afford health care and just having, whatever, more stress and those kind of things. But in in Finland, they find that the people of lower socioeconomic status, if they take the sauna more often, you know, over four times per week, then they they have a lower risk of mortality, or they can, like, mitigate the increased risk from low socioeconomic status. And even things like blood pressure and inflammation, the they find that men who have high inflammation, you know, objective marker, high inflammation, high, CRP levels, if they take the sauna over four times a week, then they have the same mortality risk as men who don't take the sauna that often and and they have normal CRP levels. So taking a sauna while having high inflammation gives you the same mortality risk as someone who doesn't have high inflammation but doesn't take the sauna. And similar findings are with their blood pressure as well. So if you have high blood pressure, if you take the sauna, you mitigate the increased risk from having high blood pressure and there's a lot of like mechanistic reasons for that. The solar mimics some aspects of exercise so it's like a very, you know, some are like it's more than zone one, it's not entirely zone two so it's, you know, you're like almost like walking in terms of your like speed of heart rate. So it's a low intensity exercise, You, improve endothelial function. You have other, like, let's say benefits for the cardiovascular system. You do, like, excrete some of the different toxins and chemicals as well, which, you know, in the modern world might be more of a issue than in the past. But, yeah, there's a lot of, like, mechanistic reasons why the sauna also has health benefits. There's epidemiological data. Again, you can't do these randomized controlled trials for the long term, but, I think the evidence from these epidemiological studies is pretty convincing, at least for me, and I am trying to get at least four times a week of, taking the sauna. Do you have a sauna at your home, or do you do you go to the gym? How do you how do you get your sauna time? I do have it at home. I also have a sauna blanket. So infrared sauna blanket, and, yeah, I can I can use it? Like, it heats up pretty pretty fast. So the main, like, way the sauna has those benefits is through increasing your body temperature. So it causes hyperthermia, so a mild fever. And, fever is something we associate with sickness, but it's actually like a, you know, a defense mechanism against infections and inflammation. So it's or, yeah, infections and pathogens. So it's actually like a good thing. Yeah. Mhmm. And this mild hyperthermia has those other mechanistic benefits on the blood vessels, on the heart, and the the brain as well. Got it. So, yeah, I I have a, infrared sauna, in my home as well. Absolutely love it. And, yeah, it it's great for detoxing, and there's there's so many benefits to it. So, yeah, I want I wanted to get that one in because I I know I I've seen you do loads of good sauna content before, so it's good to get that information to the listeners. So this has been great, Seem, talking about your upcoming book, The Longevity Leap. Where can our listeners best connect with you and find more out about the book? Yeah. The book is, expected to come out, like, late May or early June, and, it's gonna be The Longevity Leap on Amazon. If you want to learn more about my content, then, Sim Lund on all the social media platforms. Awesome. Put that in the show notes for listeners. And, Sim, it's been great having you back on, my friend. I think this is the third time we've had you on, so it's it's been great to reconnect, mate. Sounds good. Well, it's been a pleasure. Wonderful.