Recently, I published my new book, the longevity leap, that's based on over 8,000 scientific studies and reviews. I also made a video about the most important lessons I've learned from those studies. However, that video focused primarily on the fundamental components of health and longevity, such as exercise, diet, and blood work. There were also some controversial and surprising findings that I discovered, which is I'm gonna share with you in this video. I'll cover why as a man, you have to be much more careful with your longevity and which type of exercise is more important. Number one. Men need to be healthier than women to live longer. Women on average have about five years longer life expectancy than men. Centenarians are disproportionately more likely to be female. Eighty to ninety percent of them are women. This is not only a phenomenon in humans, you can also find it in other animals. What's the reason for this is not very clear. Men are obviously more likely to engage in riskier behavior and have more dangerous jobs than women. And men tend to have unhealthier lifestyle habits. They smoke more, drink more, and eat more. However, what I found from numerous studies is that women can get away with being in poor health and still live very long, whereas that's not the case with men. Let's take this study on body fatness and the risk of all cause mortality. They found that in women, there's almost no link between body fat percentage and mortality risk. No significant difference between 20 to 35% body fat. Being 20% body fat for women is quite slim, whereas 35% body fat is actually quite obese. So that's very interesting and there's almost no link between twenty and thirty five percent body fat and mortality in women. In men, however, the link is pretty linear with the lowest risk being below 15% body fat and anything above 30% being linked to a higher risk. As a man, the leaner and less body fat you have, the lower your risk of mortality, which mostly is mediated by cardiovascular disease. I like to joke that one out of ten centenarians is a man and that one man has a six pack because if you're not lean as a man, then you're not really going to live that long. Let's take another 2021 study on Olympic athletes over the last century. They found that both male and female Olympians lived on average five years longer than the general population. As you can see from the solid lines on the graph, Olympian men had a 20% greater longevity advantage over the regular men and Olympian women showed a 13% greater longevity advantage over regular women. However, as you can see, even regular non athlete women lived longer than the Olympian males. There's a smaller gap between Olympian females and regular females than it is between Olympian males and regular males. And all females tend to live longer than all males, even if the male is athletic. This shows that for a man to maximize his potential for living long, he has to be fit and athletic. Whereas a woman who doesn't exercise and isn't particularly fit will live longer than an average male and they will live longer than an athletic male as well. For women, being athletic and fit will make them live longer than an unfit woman. That's true. But even if they don't do anything for the fitness, they're very likely to live longer than their husbands, whether or not the man is exercising or not. And again, the reasons for that aren't very clear. For sure, there's a component of risky behavior in there, but there's also the theory that the differences in hormones, testosterone, and estrogen between men and women throughout their entire lifetimes also determines their life expectancy. So women who have lower testosterone and lower androgens and higher estrogen tend to live longer because of this. Number two, aerobic exercise reduces mortality risk more than resistance training. When it comes to cardio and weights, then the data consistently shows that doing both together is better than doing only one or the other alone. A 2020 meta analysis of 11 studies found that compared to no exercise, resistance training was associated with a twenty one percent lower all cause mortality and seventeen percent lower cardiovascular disease mortality. However, resistance training and aerobic exercise combined resulted in forty percent lower all cause mortality. Doing both together yielded almost double the amount of reduction in mortality risk compared to doing just resistance training alone. But when you look at head to head cardio and weightlifting alone, then you can see that cardio exercise tends to provide greater risk reduction. This 2018 UK Biobank study on half a million people found that the combination of cardio and weights resulted in greater risk reduction, but the benefits of cardiorespiratory fitness had a higher threshold than weights. Another 2024 clinical trial called CARDIA RACE on overweight or obese adults aged to the five to 70 with elevated blood pressure found that resistance training alone wasn't enough to see improvements in cardiovascular disease risk factors, whereas aerobic exercise alone or combined with resistance training did show improvements. The answer is obviously that you should do both because both exercise are important for your longevity. But if you were to look head to head, which exercise gives you greater risk reduction, then cardiovascular exercise appears to come on top every time. Doing nothing at all is obviously worse than doing only cardio or only weights. So like the bare minimum, you should do some form of exercise, whatever type of exercise it is. But if you really want to maximize your risk reduction and longevity benefits, then you want to do both together. Number three, coffee intake doesn't increase the risk of heart disease or hypertension. It actually reduces it. It's commonly thought that coffee raises blood pressure and that will eventually lead to hypertension and heart disease. Yes. In the short term, caffeine intake acutely increases blood pressure and raises other stress hormones such as cortisol. However, several meta analyses and cohort studies have found an inverse relationship between coffee consumption and the risk of hypertension. Consuming one to three cups of coffee per day in never smokers is linked to a lower risk of hypertension compared to no consumption. That's completely the opposite what you would expect and what you've been told. How is it so that consuming one to three cups of coffee a day is actually linked to lower risk of hypertension. This is thought to be explained by caffeine tolerance that increases if you consume coffee regularly. Basically, if you drink coffee every day, then your body develops a tolerance to caffeine's blood pressure raising effects and your blood pressure isn't going to rise. Whereas if you consume caffeine less regularly, then you will still experience an acute rise in blood pressure every time you consume caffeine. It also means that consuming one to two cups of coffee per day every day might be better for your blood pressure than consuming coffee on and off, you know, a few times a week. Because if you consume coffee every day, your body will adapt to it. You develop caffeine tolerance, and it's not going to raise your blood pressure. Whereas if you consume caffeine only a few times a week, then your body never adapts to it completely. And every time you consume caffeine, your blood pressure is going to rise, at least when we're talking about for the risk of hypertension. Moderate coffee consumption is also linked to a reduced risk of heart disease, diabetes, neurodegeneration, cancer, and all cause mortality compared to no consumption at all. And I don't think that you can say that people who drink coffee are also more health conscious people that they follow other healthy lifestyle habits while drinking coffee, which then explains these results. To be honest, I think it's actually the opposite. Health conscious people are actually less likely to drink coffee because they think it's bad for you. If you were to draw a Venn diagram of coffee drinkers and people who smoke, you would get almost the perfect circle. Not everyone who drinks coffee smokes but almost everyone who smokes drinks coffee. It's almost like a perfect match. Smokers are almost a 100% coffee drinkers. The caveat here is that some people are slow metabolizers of caffeine, which means that they're not really that good at metabolizing caffeine. So therefore, caffeine stays in their system for much longer. This is also the reason why they're more likely to experience hypertension and sleep problems from coffee intake. If you are a slow metabolizer, then yes, you would do better with no caffeine or very little amounts of it. But if you're a fast metabolizer, then you're gonna get all the benefits with little to no side effects. Number four, normal blood work is already linked to a higher risk of death. Your blood work is one of the most accurate ways to assess your overall health and disease risk because it reflects your organ function, your metabolic health, and your inflammation status. I presume we've all taken a blood test at least once in our life. And when you get back the results, you see these different ranges that, okay, this is the normal range where everything is normal. And if it's too high or too low, then it's out of the normal range. And if you see it, okay. I'm in the middle. I'm in a normal range. Phew. Everything is good. I'm I'm in the safe zone. But it's important to realize that being in the normal reference range isn't always actually linked to the lowest risk of death. And being in the normal range is often linked to a higher risk of death already. For example, the normal reference range for triglycerides is below a hundred and fifty milligrams per deciliter. However, anything above fifty milligrams per deciliter is already linked to a higher risk of cardiovascular disease. So the normal range is anything below a 150, but for the lowest risk, you wanna be close to 50 and below it. Another example is inflammation reflected by CRP. High CRP levels are a risk factor for heart disease and premature mortality. Normal CRP levels are 0.1 to three milligrams per liter. However, a CRP of one to three milligrams per liter is already linked to a thirty percent higher risk of all cause mortality and forty three percent higher risk of cardiovascular disease mortality. So an optimal CRP is below one and ideally close to 0.2 or even 0.1, pretty much as low as possible. These are just two examples where the normal reference range is already linked to a higher risk. If your CRP is above one, then that's already linked to a higher risk of heart disease and mortality compared to a CRP below one. Almost all other biomarkers, but not all, follow the same trend. They're linked to a higher risk even within what's considered the normal reference range. That's why it's important to understand what's the normal reference range and what's the optimal reference range linked to the lowest risk of mortality and heart disease. I discuss exactly this in my new book, the longevity leap, and I cover 70 clinically relevant biomarkers and their optimal ranges and how to improve them. Check out the link in the description to get the book. Number five, sauna combined with exercise is better than exercise alone. Exercise is clearly one of the best things for reducing your risk of chronic diseases and early mortality. However, taking the sauna is probably the second best thing after exercise. That's because there's a growing body of evidence showing that regular sauna bathing is linked to up to forty percent reduced risk of all cause mortality, sixty three percent lower risk of sudden cardiac death, and sixty three percent reduced heart disease mortality. That's a massive benefit, and you find this result even if you account for things like socioeconomic status, health status, and exercise. What's even crazier is that you appear to get even better results from exercise if you combine exercise with the sauna. A 2022 randomized controlled trial saw that exercise combined with sauna lowered systolic blood pressure and total cholesterol as well as increased VO two max more than exercise alone. So doing the sauna together with exercise ideally after exercise enhances the benefits you get from exercise. That's probably because of the low cardiovascular workout you get from the sauna. If you're sitting in a sauna, your heart rate elevates slightly, you experience mild hyperthermia, which then has anti inflammatory effects, and it also has mini cardiovascular benefits. You're not going to burn a lot of calories in the sauna. You're not going to lose a lot of fat, but you will certainly improve your cardiovascular function. And most people need to do more cardiovascular exercise. So doing the sauna is just one way of doing this low heart rate training. The benefits appear to peak if you take the sauna four times a week for twenty minutes at 70 degrees Celsius, which is what I recommend aiming for. So these are some of the surprising findings I discovered when researching the book and reading through these thousands of studies. If you want to learn more, then check out my new book, The Longevity Leap. Link in the description. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click a like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is Ceeb. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.