Welcome back to another Q and A. First question, is there anything you do for your own pleasure or stress that isn't actually healthy? So I'm gonna answer it in a way that, okay, what's the unhealthiest thing in my life? Because I think I generally have like a very healthy lifestyle. I exercise regularly, I sleep long enough consistently. Go to bed at the same time. I have a pretty good mental health. I kinda have a good diet, etcetera. So I don't have any massive red flags in my lifestyle for health. But but I think the unhealthiest thing in my my life is probably like this. Making this content on YouTube and recording videos is probably the unhealthiest part of my life. Mostly because of being under these kind of artificial lights a lot of the time. You You know, several hours at a time at some point. And also just, you know, working at the computer for pretty much all day. So, you know, I'm, I guess like a solopreneur in that sense. I run the YouTube channel. I have involvement in other businesses. You know, all my work is online and I spend many hours in front of the computer which ultimately is the unhealthiest thing in my life. I don't think it's like massively damaging my health in some sense. Yes, but probably like the excess blue light isn't that healthy. Unless I do other things to counterbalance it which I'm gonna cover shortly. But yeah, like just spending a lot of time under artificial light looking at the screen, being sedentary, that's not a healthy thing, for anyone. Now I do a very good job at counteracting those effects and balancing those effects with other healthy lifestyle, so it's not really having like a very unhealthy effect on my health. It's not really damaging my health in a serious way. But let's say for the physical movement, I have a good way to balance it in the sense that I exercise regularly. So even though I might be working many hours in front of the computer, I always have at least one hour per day of kind of more intense movement, whether that be at the gym, doing cardio, hiking, or going for longer walks, whatever it is. So that kind of already is a very great way to balance being sedentary in front of the computer. I have a standing work desk so I can adjust the height of it. I'm usually standing most of the day. I'm actually, you know, sitting only when I'm like eating something, hanging on the couch with my wife or dog and sleeping. So those are the only times or driving as well. Those are the only times I'm actually sitting. Most of the day I'm kinda standing on my work desk. And I can adjust the height. I have a walking treadmill here as well. So a lot of the time I'm actually walking on the treadmill while I'm doing something on the computer. So that's a great way to get your steps in, keep yourself moving and avoid the harm of sitting constantly. When it comes to the blue light, the artificial light, then, you know, I haven't found any good kind of healthy lights to use. I'm using like a regular LED ring light here. I can adjust the brightness of it, obviously. I can make it brighter. I can change the color. You know, sometimes my skin color looks different because it's literally just the ring light. You can make it more orange, you can make it more blue, you can make it different colors, adjust the brightness of it as well. But if I'm recording videos I'm just making it brighter, it looks better and obviously it highlights me, distinguishes me from the background in that sense. So you don't wanna be under like a candlelight. It just looks bad on a video. So I do have to use bright lights. What I do have here is, you know, I have also like a red light bulb here by a Boncharge. So I can use this as a way to kind of bring more balance to the wavelengths of light. Because extra blue light, you know, first of all, it damages your eyes, it can damage the collagen in your skin, it can disrupt your circadian rhythms if you get exposed to it at the evening. So, yeah, too much blue artificial light isn't gonna be healthy for you for many reasons. But, I kinda use some of this red light occasionally to kind of, you know, bring it together like a more holistic or more full spectrum exposure to lights. Because natural sunlight, you get a whole spectrum. You get the blue, green, orange, red lights. So you get a lot of different types of a wavelength of light which kind of balances these, wavelengths. But if you're only getting the artificial blue light then that's not a good thing. So I use the red light. I also have a red light therapy device here actually, which I use every morning, you know, this is a big one by one charge, you know, I use this every morning for like fifteen minutes, especially in the winter when, there's not that much sunlight. So, it's a good way to get some of the benefits of infrared light and red light if it's dark outside or if it's, you know, winter. So right now in Estonia it's starting to get pretty dark. We don't get that much sunlight anymore and in the winter months this kind of red light therapy device is like a game changer for me, at least. What else do I do, you know, for eye health? Looking at this screen, first of all the blue light can damage your eyes, can, you know, worsen your vision over time if you do it for decades. And Yeah, just kind of this nearsightedness, just looking things that are so close to you isn't a good thing. You reduce your, like, your vision by doing that. So what I like to do is take like eye breaks, so I have a window here behind the curtain, I look outside into long distances to kind of, you know, give your body and eyes a different vision. So you don't wanna always look at things that are so close. You know, most of our life is super close. The phone, the screen, the car, TV, whatever it is, your food. Everything is so close so you rarely have to use things that are like, you know, kilometers away. So I'm just looking out the window into the long distance every once in a while to kind of give your eyes a little bit of a break. I also take some supplements for the eyes. So, and dietary, let's say, principles to follow for the eyes. So you basically wanna get like these carotenoids from your food and maybe supplements. So like, zeaxanthin, lutein, asaxanthin as well And those kind of things, beta carotene, they protect your eyes. They also have benefits on the brain. So, I yeah. You eat egg yolks, these orange kind of vegetables and fruits, carrots, sweet potatoes. Those are the biggest sources of carotenoids, squash, pumpkins, etcetera. So, pretty like eating those on a regular basis and, like fish as well as salmon, omega-3s, your eyes are huge, hugely benefiting from omega-three intake as well, so I take some omega-three supplements, eat a lot of carotenoid foods, take some carotenoid supplements like astaxanthin, lutein, zeaxanthin, as well as to, yeah, just keep my eyes healthy. I think, having the vision is quite quite important underrated and an important part of, a healthy life because, you know, most of the circadian signalling happens through the eyes. And, with age you see this decrease in circadian alignment because of damage to the brain. The circadian cox get damaged due engaging and your eyes also get damaged due engaging which then, like reduces the circadian transmission into the eyes. So your body doesn't know what it is. Is it daytime or is it evening? Or at least there's less of this amplitude between the circadian hormones because there's less transmission to the brain through the eyes. So maintaining eyesight is a good thing for overall health. And I guess that's pretty much it, you know, most of these unhealthy things about working in front of a computer are like physical and related to eyes and, yeah I don't think that I really, I guess, suffer that much from it. But because of being able to counterbalance a lot of this harm with proper like hacks, if you will. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices which are the bond charge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes, they do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin anti aging, hormone optimization, pain management, and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the bond charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most regular therapy devices don't have the right wavelengths of light, which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Boncharge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research, and they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code SIIM, s I I m, for a 15% discount. Next question. How do we prevent kidney markers from being elevated when taking amino acids such as creatine, TMG, taurine, etcetera? In general, what can we do to increase our kidney health? So yes, some of supplements can worsen your kidney markers. Creatine is the most notorious one. Creatine increases your creatinine levels which typically results in lower eGFR levels as well. EGFR is the estimated glomerular filtration rate and low eGFR is indicative of kidney dysfunction and eventually leads to kidney disease. Now the problem with this is that creatinine is not that let's say, suitable for people who, yeah, take creatine or they have more muscle mass or they exercise. There's a pretty good correlation between how much muscle mass you have and how high your creatinine levels are. So even if you do like regular exercise, you have slightly more muscle mass than the average person, then your creatinine levels on the blood work tend to be out of the range, too high. Now, I wouldn't say that it's necessarily indicative of kidney damage or something like that. Because, you just have more muscle and you exercise which then kind of creates this result. And usually eGFR on the standard blood panel is calculated from creatinine. Which then gives you this kind of a pseudo effect of kidney dysfunction that your eGFR is low, your creatinine is high, but that's because of your muscle mass or taking creatine. A more reliable blood marker to use for kidney health is Cystatin C. So, you can also calculate eGFR from Cystatin C. So, if your lab uses creatinine and it tells you that your eGFR is too low, then it might be because of the high Creatinine levels from Creatine or Muscle Mass or something like that. But if it's calculated from Cystatin C which is less affected by Muscle Mass and Creatine and those kind of things then that's a more reliable marker for EGR. So I always like to look at Cystatin C more so than with creatinine levels. And some of the other amino acids, you know, taurine and TMG, I haven't found that much much evidence that they would worsen kidney health in most people, but creatine is generally the one that, does, do that. So, yeah, the first thing to do is to just look at your cystatin C and calculate your eGFR from cystatin C, not creatinine. If that makes sense. While the other things to kind of, do to improve kidney health then, you know, supplements you know, there's not that much evidence that a ton of supplements would harm the kidneys as long as you're, like, a healthy person but it might. So, you know, cutting out some of the supplements in the short term obviously can improve kidney health. I don't think they're, like, causally, gonna worsen your kidney health. But, in some situations people who take too much supplements they might see some suboptimal, like, kidney markers. But that's usually because of other things related to, like, body composition, their overall diet, their other blood markers. So what are some things you can do? You know, usually kidney disease walks hand in hand with, diabetes, so high blood sugar levels and high blood pressure are generally the ones that drive kidney disease and kidney dysfunction as well. So looking at those things, losing some weight, lowering your blood pressure, managing stress, sleeping enough, fixing your diet, reducing some extra carbohydrates or something like that to improve your blood sugar. Those are all like useful tips. And, even let's say you're generally healthy, even then a diet that is too high in phosphorus is also being seen to, damage your kidneys and also lead to kidney disease. Now the thing here is that this is so only in the absence of magnesium or like a low magnesium status. So if you have high phosphorus levels from eating a lot of animal protein or drinking too much Coca Cola, whatever the case is, which are the highest sources of phosphorus, like, usually you get it a lot from animal protein like milk, dairy, eggs, but you also get it from, carbonated beverages, sodas. So high phosphorus levels, for whatever the reason is, does, like, worsen kidney function. But it's mostly an issue if you have also low magnesium status. So you need to also make sure that you have adequate magnesium intake and adequate magnesium levels. So I usually either reducing the phosphorus or increasing the magnesium can improve that marker. So personally I can say, you know, my eGFR is pretty high. If you and I've never actually had like high creatinine levels either. Although I take, you know, creatinine I have more than average in muscle mass. And I exercise as well more than average. So, theoretically my creatinine levels, you know, should be higher but I think because I manage my phosphorus, magnesium balance quite well, it's not so. So my creatinine levels and my overall kidney markers are like excellent because I probably get like at least five hundred to six hundred mg of magnesium per day from foods plus supplements and, my phosphorus intake isn't that high. Like I'm not eating a ton of muscle meat. I do eat like dairy quite a lot. I don't drink any like, you know, Coca Cola or something like that. But, Yeah, I'm getting plenty of Magnesium probably which then kind of keeps the Phosphorus balanced and my kidney function in check. My EGR calculator from Creatinine last time was like 120, which is like super high. And my Cystatin C was also like in the optimal zone. So yeah, everything is, great from that sense. But, to sum it up for kidney health, avoid hypertension, avoid obesity, avoid high blood sugar levels, don't consume too much phosphorus, probably most people need more magnesium and, Yeah. And, yeah, like if you're looking at your kidney markers then look at Cystatin C more so than Creatinine. But I think if you're in excellent health, your Creatinine levels should still be normal. Even if you have more muscle mass and even if you take creatine for example. Next question, is magnesium stearate in supplements harmful? So magnesium stearate is one type of magnesium supplement companies use. It has no like nutritional effect. It's generally used as like a filler. And, yeah, there is some, like, at least cell studies indicating that MgStearate could have some harmful effects like raising inflammation or worsening immune system function, increasing autoimmunity, etc. But, you know, most of those are generally like cell studies and there's not like a ton of human studies proving those effects. So I personally would say that, you know, magnesium stearate itself it serves no like real purpose or it has no unique benefits that you would need it in a supplement. But I don't think it's like the end of the world either. So, if it says Magnesium Stearate and you are like kind of sensitive to it then I would maybe choose supplement brands that don't have Magnesium Stearate in there. But personally I don't really worry about it that much because I don't really notice any harm from that. Next question. Does nocinamide inhibit SIRT1? So this question relates to me saying that niacinamide is a great NAD booster because it supports the NAD salvage pathway. So yes, there are cell studies that see that niacinamide inhibits SIRT1. But what they see is that when the niacinamide gets converted to NED it actually has a stimulatory effect on SIRT1. So it's not permanent inhibition of SIRT1 by niacinamide and, it actually tends to increase the effects of, or like increase the stim- it stimulates, SIRT1. So it's only like a short term inhibition and in the long term it doesn't have that effect because niacinamide can convert it into NAD and raises your NAD levels. Now, second of all, whether or not SIRT1 inhibition matters is also like somewhat, I guess, it's pretty, mixed. You know, there's no animal studies showing that SIRT1 would extend lifespan. People who live longer tend to have higher SIRT1 expression. You increase SIRT1 with things like calorie restriction, exercise, etc. Staying healthy, etc. So there is no evidence that this inhibition of SIRT1 would have any harmful effects on long term health. And, yeah, second of all Sirt-one over expression in animals hasn't been seen to extend lifespan anyway. So most of the sirtuins actually haven't been found. Or like actually I personally would say that none of the sirtuins haven't shown to extend lifespan in animals. The only one that has shown life lifespan extension in animals is SIRT6. But the problem with those studies is that those mice that get SIRT6 overexpression, they also have low baseline IGF-one levels. And there's like two studies done with SIRT6 overexpression, both showing life extension effects, but those mice have low IGF-one levels, which probably explains those results. You know, unless we have future studies controlling for that. But low IGF-one is pretty repeated and consistently shown to extend lifespan in animals. By, like, down regulating the growth pathways etc. So it's hard to say that SIRT6 is SIRT1, SIRT3, SIRT4, SIRT5, SIRT7, none of them have actually shown either life extension in animals. So niacinamide inhibiting SIRT1 in the short term before it gets converted to NAD, it's, I guess, I would say like it doesn't matter at all. Next question. I would like to know the best biohacks for shift work. What would you do to prepare for a night shift to endure during a night shift and to recover from a night shift? So yeah, night shift is a bit of a tricky situation. It's, you know, not healthy for you. Disrupts your circadian rhythms, can, result in some sleep loss. So you can only like mitigate the harm. You can't like completely counteract it. The most important thing is probably to still make sure that you get adequate amounts of sleep regardless of when you get it. So sleep deprivation as a baseline of sleeping less than seven hours is still harmful for you. Regardless if you sleep at daytime or evening. So, you know, whenever the time is try to get at least seven hours of sleep per day. I think that, you know, when you finish your shift work. Let's say you finish around 6AM 7AM. Generally, you would probably wanna go to bed and get that sleep. And I think the best time to get the sleep is, you know, after you finish the shift work and, the second best time is to sleep slightly a few hours before the night shift. So let's say your night shift begins 10PM. You sleep somewhere between five to 7PM for two hours or one and a half hours. Whatever it is. Get a short nap somewhere close to the beginning of the shift work so that you wouldn't feel so tired during the shift work and that you wouldn't like abuse caffeine or something like that to stay up during the shift work. So you wanna have like a bank a little bit before the shift work. And that's gonna be something like one and a half, three hours at max before the shift work, something like three to four hours before the shift work begins. And then, when you finish the shift work, generally you'll be probably tired so you'll just go to bed. Second of all, when it comes to sports activity then yes, doing sports regardless of the time is associated with lower mortality risk. Even among shift workers. So if you do shift work but you don't exercise, then the risk or the, like, harmful effects on your health are much greater than, if you do exercise. So regardless of when you can exercise, exercise is better than not exercising at all. I would say that exercising during the daytime is healthier than exercising at night, you know. And if you're doing night shift then, you know, you probably won't be able to exercise during the shift. So, like, yeah, I would say you after you wake up from the night shift, so you go to bed like 6AM, you wake up at twelve or something, then you should like exercise, pretty much within a few hours after waking up. Have your meal as well, you don't wanna eat like massive amounts of food at night time when it's a biological night time. But, you don't wanna like, let's say do a lot of fasting during the day time either. So you don't wanna like bank all of your calories into the evening. To show you what? Wanna maintain some coherence with with the circadian rhythms and that means having, you know, not a breakfast probably but, you know, having lunch or something like that. Having, you know, maybe a later dinner if you're like going to bed or like going to work slightly later and that would be enough. So you wanna consume most of the calories in the food still during the biological day time, not in the middle of the night. If that makes sense. If you get hungry during your night shift then like the best kind of snacks would be to you know, have something like, something that has protein. Some protein shake, cottage cheese, something that, that, isn't like massive and doesn't contain like a ton of, carbohydrates or fats. So like protein is generally like the safest alternative to have during a night shift. Some supplements, you know, I would say supplemental wise, NAD boosters for sure can be useful here because they increase your NAD levels which will be lower because of the night shift and the sleep loss. So taking some NAD boosters like Niacinamide, NMN or NR, can have benefits. What else? Magnesium probably to help with sleep and the stress. And omega three's as well because you'll be probably under the artificial lights a lot during the night time then you can use like the carotenoids plus the omega three's to kind of counterbalance that. And, yeah, lastly I would say that you wanna get adequate daytime and sun exposure during the daytime. Because if you're, like, working at night then, you know, you don't wanna be like a night owl. So you wanna still get exposed to some sunlight during the day time whenever possible. Next question. Say you were going through a time in which you would need to bring utmost productivity to every single day. Let's say due to a deadline. Which things of your daily routine would you definitely keep and which would you leave out? So yeah, if you're on a deadline or there's just a lot of things going on in your life, then it's hard to, you know, get all your steps in, get your exercise in, get all the sleep etc. What I think matters most is getting something like at least seven hours of sleep, at least getting 8,000 steps per day and at least working out three times per week. That's pretty much three of the most important things, I would always keep. Because you know you're trying to be productive. If you sleep less then you actually end up becoming less productive although you might gain a few hours of sleep. Like I learned that when I was doing the Polyphasic sleep. You know I was sleeping four hours a day with Polyphasic sleep. You know I gained three four extra hours into my day. You know I didn't lose a ton of productivity but I wouldn't say that I gained massive amounts of it either. So just sleeping at least seven hours per night. Maybe even up to eight hours. Is going to maintain your productivity and enables you to recover. And if you deliberately sleep restrict yourself for a prolonged period of time, you know, in the short term at least you'll see a drop in cognition, your productivity actually goes down, your blood markers also tend to worsen, you'll feel worse, you'll look worse, so there's no benefit to actually depriving yourself of sleep even if you are on a deadline. And if you are like short on time. It's much more important to like maybe cut down on exercise in the short term than it is to cut down on sleep. But speaking of exercise, you know exercise itself has benefits on productivity. Like your brain works better, you feel better, your body just functions better if you still exercise at least, you know, three times per week. Yes, you don't have all the time to do zone two cardio, to do all the hits, to do have, like, two hour weightlifting sessions. You don't have time for that. You know, about three three times per week, forty five minutes at the gym each, that's like already maximum benefits you can get from weightlifting. So even if you cut down to two weightlifting sessions per week forty five minutes each then, that's already very beneficial. And speaking of walking then, you know I think walking is also such a easy low, low effort activity that has a ton of benefits. Again your brain feels better, your body feels better, you just have more stable blood sugar, just more energy by going for regular walks. So like if you're ever stuck in a like airplane or you're like stuck in a house, for an entire day, you feel awful at the end of the day because you didn't move. Whereas if you get your walks, you get at least like an hour walk everyday, then, you just look and feel better. I think, you know, 8,000 steps is, pretty easy to get. If you're struggling with it, get like a standing work desk with a walking treadmill. It's one of the easiest ways to get your steps in. If you don't have the time for that then just go for like, kind of a Let's say, more frequent walking breaks. So ten minute walks, three to five times a day, and also doing like some of these exercise snacks, which are these, sixty second relatively intense physical, breaks, where you like run up run up and down the stairs for sixty seconds, do jumping jacks for sixty seconds or something like that. It's kinda this short, vigorous activity that like increases your alertness, increases your energy. So that's also like a very easy thing to do. I wouldn't, yeah, like, sacrifice the exercise that much. I wouldn't, you know, spend a ton of time at the gym or spend a ton of time doing cardio. I would just, you know, okay, bare minimum effort forty five minutes twice a week. That's the most, effective way to kind of go about it, at least in the short term. And then do like a few exercise breaks. I do like, you know, the fasting as well, you know, it saves a lot of time. If you eat like once or twice a day you don't have to spend a ton of time, eating. So that I guess that's also one way to go about it. But you know, that's what I've been doing for the last eight years. Next question, is sitting in a hot tub at 40 degrees Celsius an alternative to sauna? So hot tubs, warm baths, steam rooms, infrared sauna blankets, infrared saunas, regular saunas, they all work through increasing your body temperature which which then activates these heat shock proteins that increases your heart rate, gives you like a mini cardio workout and also makes you sweat so that you excrete microplastics and different kind of toxins, heavy metals etc. It's not yeah, like Doesn't matter which type of sauna it is. It can be hot tub, as long as your body temperature rises that's where you get the health benefits. Now the thing with hot tubs is that, for men at least it might not be the most suitable thing because you're like boiling your balls and your testicles so you're actually reducing your sperm count. Now there is some evidence that a regular sauna can also reduce sperm count if you like do a ton of it or if you're not cooling down your testicles. But I think the direct exposure of the warm water in a hot tub has a worse effect, much worse effect than a regular sauna. So in the regular sauna you could at least have like an ice pack on your testicles to cool down the testicles or you can take a cold shower or a cold bath immediately after that. But in the hot tub, the water is like, you know, immediately around the testicles and it's literally boiling them at the same time so it might not be the best solution. Even if you take a cold shower after that it's like too late and the kind of your body temperature will rise, your testicle temperature will rise a lot higher in the hot tub than in the sauna. If that makes sense. So yes, hot tubs can give you some benefits as you would get from a regular sauna but personally I'm not a big fan because of that reason. For men at least. For women it doesn't really matter that much. Next question. More and more studies are showing that olive oil is very healthy. However, a good olive oil can be quite expensive. Do you know alternative oils that are comparably healthy? So yes, olive oil has a long track record of health benefits. Mostly has to do with these anti inflammatory effects. It lowers lipids, lowers blood sugar, lowers blood pressure, and, a lot of the health benefits of this, of this olive oil come from the polyphenol content. So the higher polyphenol content is what, like, mediates those effects. Now there are certain fatty acids as well in olive oil that have helping if it's like oleic acid etcetera. But, you know, personally I think the polyphenol content is what, like what matters the most. Now a good alternative to that is to just eat olives. If you don't have that much money to buy expensive olive oil, which again would be actually, you know, a big priority to do because a lot of the cheap olive oils are mixed with canola oil and they tend to be like worse quality. So if you do buy olive oil then the higher, let's say price olive oil tends to be worth it. Especially if you consume it like on a regular basis. But regardless, if you don't buy the olive oil you can eat the olives, which are great. Like, you know, olive oil is made of olives. You can eat a lot of olives as well to get these polyphenols and these healthy fats from there. Now the thing with olives is that you don't wanna buy the black olives because that's like food dyes. You wanna buy just the regular green olives without the dyes. They taste good. Kind of salty, nice. You would probably have to eat quite a lot of olives to get a sufficient amount of these polyphenols but at least they're like at one source. Second of all, I wouldn't say like olive Sorry, I wouldn't say like oil is a good alternative. I would say that just foods that have polyphenols are a great alternative. So foods like, walnuts are super high in polyphenols. They're actually one of the highest polyphenol foods in the world. Different nuts and seeds, vegetables, fruits, blueberries, teas, coffee, they're all very high in polyphenols. So just kind of focus a lot on those foods if, you can't eat a ton of olive oil. But if we are speaking of oils specifically, then, you know, avocado oil is usually used for cooking. I wouldn't say that it's, like, especially healthy, it just has a high smoking point. It doesn't have, like, a ton of, like, it maybe, you know, has some, like, healthy compounds, but it's not as much as, olive oil, and I would say, like, black seed oil is another one of those oils that has health benefits, but it's kind of bitter and not tasty. When olive oil is actually tasty then the black black seed oil, you know, you don't wanna, like, kind of, use it as salad dressing. It's not, like, super tasty. But you can use it as, like, a spoon, I guess. Not sure how much price difference is but, yeah. I personally would kinda gravitate more towards eating the olives, eating the walnuts, eating the blueberries, drinking coffee, eating the vegetables. You can get a ton of these polyphenols. And also herbs and spices. So curcumin, rosemary, thyme, those are super high in polyphenols, and you can use them like kind of teaspoons in your salad or foods. You can cook your meats with rosemary to reduce the glycation effects. So, yeah, a ton of herbs. Just use a ton of herbs. Berries, vegetables, walnuts and coffee. And the last question of the week is: Since asexanthin is a potent antioxidant, would it have effects of negative feedback on body's natural antioxidant production? Would it have a negative effect on exercise and muscle growth? So asexanthin has pretty high antioxidant potential. It's got one of the highest ORAC scores in the world which, refers to antioxidant potential or capacity. So Azaxanthin is, yeah, like super effective in reducing inflammation and oxidative stress. Now, does it affect your body's natural antioxidant capacity? Then, not really. I haven't found any evidence for that. You know, sometimes with these antioxidants like vitamin c or n a c, they using them after a resistance training workout especially, they tend to, like, blunt some of the positive adaptations to that exercise. But it doesn't apply to some of these antioxidants or anti inflammatory supplements like, omega three's for example. Omega three supplementation has been found to actually enhance muscle growth by reducing muscle damage. And the same applies to azaxanthin. I've seen studies in animals and in humans that azaxanthin actually enhances muscle growth and protein synthesis and it doesn't necessarily blunt that, response. Personally, I would take asexanthin kind of before workouts rather than post workouts, to avoid any potential issues, but, even then based on the evidence then it doesn't appear to, like, negatively affect muscle growth or exercise. Whereas some of these other, like NSAIDs, aspirin, and NAC, and vitamin C, in large doses they actually appear to, reduce the, muscle growth effects at least. The effects of like endurance and muscle strength might be different but for muscle hypertrophy because muscle hypertrophy is driven partly by inflammation, this cell swelling, inflammation is kind of a necessary component to the muscle size increasing. Which isn't the case for strength, which is like a nervous system adaptation and is not the case for like endurance, either. So, yeah, I do take Astaxanthin and I think it's great. I haven't seen any, like, inhibitory effects on muscle growth or something like that. It helps with skin and, yeah, it's, generally great. Alright, that's it for this Q and A. If you wanna ask me a question in the future, then make sure you follow me on Instagram at simlund. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click a like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is sim. Stay optimized, stay empowered.