Alright. First question. Are too many supplements bad for the organs like the kidneys? So this is a very common idea behind taking supplements that if you take too many supplements then it's going to harm your kidneys, it's going to harm your liver etcetera. Now my opinion about it is that you should just test it and see how does it affect your kidney markers because there's millions of people in the world who don't take any supplements, but they have kidney problems and they have liver problems. So taking supplements isn't exclusively responsible for kidney problems or liver problems. It all depends on the particular context, the individual and what's the actual outcome. So there's always some like, amount of unexpectedness or randomness as well in this. So some people might react to certain supplements in a negative way that increases their liver enzymes or worsens their kidney function. So the most important thing is to just measure yourself and see. Because if you don't measure, then you don't know if a certain supplement has a negative effect on your kidneys. Now theoretically, you know, yes, certain supplements can negatively affect kidney function. And the most notorious ones usually are like creatine, which, the myth is that creatine causes kidney damage, which isn't the case. Creatine might worsen kidney function in people with already existing kidney kidney dysfunction, but it's not inherently going to cause it. So again, you need to measure and depends on the individual. There's also a lot of studies actually on specific herbal supplements, even things like Ashwagandha, Curcumin, some of the other herbal compounds. They have been also found to, first of all, increase liver enzymes as well as actually cause like acute liver injury in certain, individuals. Now those are mostly case studies, so they're not like large populations of people getting kidney or liver problems from herbal supplements. Is mostly some individual case studies and the problem here is like a lot of herbal supplements aren't regulated. They might be contaminated with certain compounds. So a lot of the herbal supplement market is, yeah, kind of like a wild west or a no man's land in terms of that. So you never know really what you're getting. So I don't really take a lot of herbal supplements because it's, yeah, potentially dangerous and it might have negative effects on your liver specifically. But, if you have third party tested and well trusted supplement brands, then theoretically for most people is not going to like worsen kidney function. You know, you just still have to measure but, based on the evidence right now then you don't see that. And of course there are some cases if you have maybe certain supplements interact with each other or if yes, if there are like hundreds of compounds then maybe it can worsen kidney function. Now I have found on Twitter actually a few people, even like doctors, like pretty renowned doctors saying that they've seen a lot of people taking a very popular supplement stack that is popular right now and, that it worsens their kidney, their patients' kidney function. Now they didn't mention what stack it is. They did say it's popular right now. So you you can maybe think I'm not I don't know exactly also what stack it is. I can predict which one it is maybe, but, yeah theoretically too many supplements could worsen kidney function and, the most important thing is to just measure. I'm taking, you know, right now less than ten supplements a day. My kidney function is perfect. My liver function is also like, very good And even Joe Cohen, who takes a hundred and sixty supplements per day, his liver and kidney function is also great. So he has no problems with that. So again, the most important thing is to measure. Next question, as of my genetic test, I'm a slow caffeine metabolizer. You've mentioned in one of your VRP tips that vitamin c helps to break down caffeine. What are other things that help break down caffeine? So, yes, the unfortunate situation is that there are genetically fast metabolizers and slow metabolizers of caffeine. And, I'm a, like, a fast metabolizer, so I can drink coffee even, like, very late in the evening and I'll still sleep, very good. Whereas other people, yes, they drink coffee in the morning and even then they get insomnia or something like that. So, yeah, caffeine I think a lot of the negative effects that people have relating to caffeine intake has to do with their caffeine metabolism, adenes. So if you are the slow metabolizer, then you tend to get more anxiety, you tend to get more, like, heartbeat problems or hypertension effects from, and and insomnia effects as well from caffeine. Whereas if you're a fast metabolizer, then most of the fast metabolizers don't get any negative effects because they metabolize the caffeine very fast. And, yeah, what are some ways to kind of burn through the caffeine faster? Then yes, vitamin c does that. So I mentioned that in my newsletter and that there's also things like the, let's say these are tubers like a carrots actually also do that. So what I like to do is like in the evenings kiwi that's high in vitamin C and, you know, I don't drink usually caffeine very late in the day. I'll stop it at noontime typically, but just having the extra vitamin c in the evening, I I feel that yeah, it's pretty kind of useful tip to have especially if you're a slow metabolizer. Now other things as well that increase your sleep drive would be like exercise. So the higher your sleep drive, the bigger your desire to fall asleep is. So if you've exercised a lot then that has been found to increase sleep quality and also reduces the time it takes to fall asleep. So and that those studies even find that the more exercise you do the better the sleep quality is. So even if you exercise several hours a day then that gives you even greater benefits for sleep quality than exercising only, you know, twenty minutes per day. So the more exercise you do, the more tired you will be and the better you will sleep. And the second thing is also sunlight exposure. So getting exposed to this infrared light from the sunlight increases melatonin production, also increases sleep drive and, has been found to improve sleep quality and reduce time it takes to fall asleep. And maybe last tip would be to not, you know, eat too late before bed. So, and that includes, these small caffeinated beverages. So like teas, they have very small amounts of caffeine, but if you're a slow metabolizer then even drinking tea in the evening can disrupt your sleep. And, chocolate, so, you know, milk chocolate has very little or technically has no, like, legitimate amounts of cacao, but, still a small amount of it can still keep you up if you are a slow metabolizer of caffeine. Next question, when and how do you think is longevity escape velocity going to begin? So the longevity escape velocity is this idea that as science and medicine progresses, then at a certain point it's become so advanced that every chronological year that has passed the science and medical breakthroughs will enable you to live, you know, at least as much more alive and potentially even more. So it's it's like this exponential curve in your life expectancy. Over the last century you've seen that life expectancy across the world has steadily increased. So, right now in the world it's like seventy three point two years or seventy four years across the entire world and some of the longest longest living countries like Macau, Hong Kong, South Korea, Japan, they're like in the in the low eighties, 83, 82, 84 is the like average life expectancy in those countries. Now is it going to reach a point where the life expectancy is going to be 200, which is the longevity escape velocity that in the year 2200, you will live four hundred years because every year that has passed we learn more and more about medicine that it just keeps you alive. Now when is it going to happen? Well theoretically it's possible. I'll say that. So like, I don't think there's anything like that would, say that is impossible. The problem is, yeah, I think many people are overestimating how fast it would or, like, overestimating when we would reach that point. So there's Aubrey de Grey and others saying that it's gonna happen in 2035, which is in ten years. Others say it's 2040, 2045, so whatever it is, it doesn't matter. But right now there's no evidence that we're even even close to that. Now of course, yeah, maybe in five years AI is going to be so advanced that it's going to figure it out and then we'll reach it super fast. So yeah the exponential curve is that it's exponential. So like, it goes steadily, steadily and then it's going up like a hockey stick. So there's a lot of unknowns in that scenario so I don't necessarily know yeah I don't I'm not able to say given like a definite prediction okay it's gonna be 2034 or 2045. I have no idea based on the current evidence because it's very unpredictable. Now personally I'm more more thinking that it's probably not going to happen at the end of this century. It might take another hundred years or something about for for us to figure it out. So that's my personal belief based on you know what's out there right now because we have zero like evidence that we'll be able to extend the human lifespan beyond 120 right now. The mathematical projections for average life expectancy is going to be that, the average life expectancy in South Korea and etcetera, on Australia, these richer countries, it is going to be in the nineties, and, the longest living people will live over 120, but the the the peak is like a 130 years of age at the end of this century is is what the longest living people will be. But the average life expectancy is still going to be like maybe in the nineties in the next few decades. So that's my personal belief based on the information that I've seen, you know. And that doesn't because it takes a lot of like almost like religious belief in AI to believe that the longevity escape velocity is here or that is around the corner because you're like so deeply invested in the idea that you're just almost like religiously believing in it without any actual concrete evidence to support that idea. Because right now we literally have no evidence that it's possible. Although theoretically, it would be possible, but, practically no. This episode is brought to you by Bond Charge, my favorite company for blue blocking glasses, red light therapy devices, and red light light bulbs. These items are essential for keeping your sleep wake on the cycles aligned in a world that tries to mess them up. Instead of looking at your phone before bed and letting the blue light disrupt your melatonin production, why not wear blue blockers instead that prevent that from happening? Instead of having your bedroom lit up with bright lights, use the more sleep friendly alternative by opting for flicker free red light light bulbs that don't disrupt your sleep. Boncharge also has amazing infrared sauna blankets that can give you the same health benefits as the traditional sauna. You also get the unique benefits of infrared light that improves joint and skin health. Head over to boncharge.com forward /seamlund and use the code seam, s I I m, for a 15% discount. Next question, what would you do to improve your sleep when you sleep seven to eight hours but I wake up three to four times? So, that's a very classical scenario. Some people might get very little deep sleep, some people might get very little REM sleep. Now from my own experience and experimentations, I've noticed that, if I want to increase my deep sleep, then I need to be more careful with blocking out blue light before bed and avoiding food consumption before bed. So I think if you extend the period of fasting before bed then or you basically have an earlier dinner, then, that typically improves sleep quality and deep sleep specifically. And I have seen, minor improvements from that. So for blue blocking specifically, I've seen, like, 15% increase in my deep sleep. And with the earlier dinner, I've seen also something like five to 10% improvement. But, the earlier dinner for me also improves REM sleep. So, I get more REM sleep as well if I stop eating right now, stopping like five hours before bed. And whereas in the past it might have been like three hours or something and I've still seen improvements. For REM sleep, you also want to stay in bed for longer. So, it's important to understand the hierarchy of sleep or the sleep architecture. So the first half of the night, the first four hours when you go to bed is predominantly, deep sleep or your body prioritizes deep sleep in that phase. And in the second half of the night, the last four hours of sleep, you're getting more REM sleep and less deep sleep. So if you're suffering from either of them, either REM sleep or deep sleep, then you need to you need to look at which end of the sleep cycle are you compromising in. So like if you're compromising in the beginning of your sleep stage, which would be getting exposed to blue light and going to bed at the wrong time and maybe eating too early or too close to bedtime, then those are the things that will improve your or reduce your sleep deep sleep quality. And for REM sleep, it mostly comes down to similar things like food intake improved my REM sleep, but, what improved my REM sleep was also staying in bed for longer. So I if I if I wake up too early, I get out of bed, you know, at, like, 5AM or something, then yes, my REM sleep is going to be cut short. So, yeah, like, if you are waking up too early then, that might explain the low REM sleep. But for deep sleep, I would investigate more into, yeah, like the blue light, the things that immediately impact your deep sleep in the in the beginning of the sleep cycle. So like you can take magnesium, glycine, theanine, something like that to block blue light and, stop eating in at least four hours before bed. I will try it out. Next question. What's the biomarker or bodily function that you most want to improve that currently doesn't have a proven method of rejuvenation? So me personally, I don't have any like massive problems in my blood work or other health markers that I would want to improve. You know, I have mentioned I'm trying to get my homocysteine better, which is already, you know, in the good range. So Homocysteine is a risk factor for heart disease. If it's too high, then it can cause endothelial dysfunction and inflammation. My Homocysteine was at 12, which is slightly above what would be optimal. So you want to get it below 10. Five is the lowest risk and, something between five to 10 is, kind of the sweet spot. And, I've gotten my homocysteine below 10 right now, so it's working and, you know, I'm happy with it already. So I would try to get it even lower to like five and for that I'm just increasing my trimethylglycine intake, TMG. So I was taking two grams of TMG per day, which got me below 10 and now I've increased it to four grams of TMG per day. So I'll measure homocysteine again and see if it even reduces it further. So homocysteine is very affected by genetics. It is affected by methylation, even affected by exercise. Like exercising increases your homocysteine levels and I exercise a lot and and you know I might have some like suboptimal methylation genes as well. So yeah I might have to take larger amounts of TMG to reduce that. And there are other people who also exercise a lot but they have just lower homocysteine levels for whatever reason for some other genetic reason. So it's a very like individual dependent marker. There's from a dietary perspective there's not a lot of actually foods that would like worsen your homocysteine unless you are like super deficient in b twelve or some other b vitamins. So, yeah. It's interesting that it's determined a lot by genetics. Now when the second half of the question like is there any bodily function I would like to regenerate or, that doesn't have currently evidence or proven methods of regeneration. So I'm just gonna answer what would be beneficial for humanity as a whole, not me. I think if we're if we were to able to, like, reverse coronary artery calcification and atherosclerosis, then that would just extend average human lifespan by at least, you know, five to ten years and it would also eliminate one of the or reduce the burden of the biggest bottleneck in people's longevity, which is heart disease. So most people in the modern world will die to some form of heart disease and, you know, it can happen in your sixties or seventies, so it doesn't happen very late. It happens pretty early, relatively speaking, in your life expectancy journey. So, yeah, would if if we could find a way to regenerate, like, arteries or something or help to reverse coronary artery calcification consistently and like in in in great ways or like in effective ways then that will be the biggest like longevity breakthrough right now for humanity, at least in the short term. And right now there are yeah, like a few supplements that you can find okay, reverses calcium scores or improves endothelial function or reverses soft plaque or something like that, reduces soft plaque, but those results aren't like massive. They're not like completely eradicating it. They're like you see like a small decrease in your calcium score if you take a certain supplement or statin or something like that. So we do have some things that haven't shown to reduce these calcium scores and plaque buildup, but they're not enough, unfortunately. Like, we want to have some sort of a breakthrough, like some other therapeutic that would, yeah, like, completely eradicate it or completely regenerate it. Then it would be one of the biggest game changers for, the average life expectancy across the world. Next question. What do you think about mTOR signaling? Important for muscle growth but also important to suppress for disease prevention slash longevity. Do you think these are opposite ideas and is there a trade off? Health span versus lifespan? Yeah. This is one of the age old questions or one of the, you know, main theories of longevity and aging is the mTOR signaling theory that mTOR expression accelerates aging and there is pretty compelling or very consistent studies in animals that yes, excess mTOR signaling is linked to different cancers and shorter lifespans and suppressing mTOR with like rapamycin or calorie restriction or something else like that extends, animal lifespan. And that I think is pretty widely accepted that it is the case in the longevity like scientific community. Yeah. But the problem is, yeah, that in humans there might be trade offs if you chronically suppress mTOR signaling, especially for muscle mass and muscle strength. I think it's very it might be a little bit overblown the idea that suppressing mTOR would like somehow shorten your lifespan. Yes, you do need mTOR, but, your body has very, like, good ways to also so there's I I guess the issue is that the there's there's no studies actually looking at okay what does mTOR signaling do in humans over the long term or what does chronic suppression of mTOR do in humans over the long term. So chronic mTOR suppression, it can induce insulin resistance in people and, it can also, you know, potentially reduce muscle mass. Now there is some some of the some of it has to do with, which mTOR complex mTOR complex are you suppressing. So there's two mTOR complexes mTOR C1 mTOR C2. If you suppress mTOR c two then that, has been found to potentially increase the risk of incident resistance. Maybe even like can have a negative effects on bone density but not with mTOR c one. So, there are certain like this rapamycin or rapalogs that specifically target mTOR C1 which would, kind of avoid the risk of insulin resistance. So you don't want to chronically suppress mTOR C2 but suppressing mTOR C1 might have longevity benefits at least based on animal studies. Now whether or not you want to suppress mTOR with rapamycin or something else, you know, I wouldn't do it right now based on the evidence but, you know, from a dietary standpoint there are certain things that you can do within reason like you can do some aspects of calorie restriction, which would mean that you you're not gaining too much weight and you maintain normal body weight then I think you already maintain a pretty good balance with this mTOR and I think the the key here is to just look at the biomarkers. So there's no biomarker specifically to assess mTOR activation, so you don't know are you expressing too much mTOR, are you under expressing mTOR, But there are a few like proxy biomarkers that you can use as well. So like IGF one, I think it's a pretty good marker for assessing the growth signaling in the body. So too much too high IGF one levels are linked to cancer and heart disease, but too low IGF one levels are also linked to increased frailty and increased mortality. So you could think, okay, you can use IGF one as a proxy to know are you in this excess growth state or are you too catabolic? Is there a risk for you to be too frail with too low bone density and too low muscle mass or is there a risk of cancer if your IGF-one level is too high? And there was a recent 2023 meta analysis that looked at what's the optimal range of IGA one and it's like 115 to 130 is the kind of sweet spot for the lowest risk. And if your IGA one is like 300, 400 then that might be you know I would want to kind of reduce it to into the one hundreds at least. Now if your IJ of one level is like below a 100 then chances are you might be too frail, you might have too low muscle mass, you might not eat enough, you might be malnourished. So that's those are the things that reduce IGF-one expression like prolonged calorie restriction, malnutrition and frailty. But again you need to measure your muscle mass and bone density as well then. So if your bone density and muscle mass are high or adequate then I don't think you have a lot to worry about low IGF-one levels because in most of the studies low IGF-one levels are because of malnutrition primarily. But if your bone density is high and your muscle mass is high, your other biomarkers are fine, then I'm personally thinking that low IGF-one actually might be beneficial. If you have granted that you have high muscle mass and high muscle strength and high VO2 max and you know all those things. So if you're a healthy fit person, you're lean, then a lower IGF-one level is, in my opinion at least, I would think it's better. Next question, how can someone improve their HRV besides doing zone two cardio training and getting enough sleep? Is electrical current therapy worth considering? So HRV, yes, being on the leaner side, exercising regularly, walking, etcetera, being kind of physically active, those things will increase HRV typically and reduce your resting heart rate, which is a good like adaptation. Other things that work, I think like sauna, like hot and cold therapy, doing the sauna and ice bath or some cold shower even, I think that is also at least from my own experience is what increases HRV quite quite a lot and if you're already doing everything else then adding the sauna in my opinion would also improve HRV. Now you don't want to over stress it, like chronic stress reduces HRV, so you also need to make sure that yeah your body is able to handle it and and you don't want to become too stressed about all the exercise that you might do or the saunas or whatever it is. So yeah, relaxation is important for that. Music therapy has been found to increase HRV. So you just want to do things as well that make you feel good. Like you know entertainment or listening to music or socializing, just walking. You know, you don't always have to be like go go go and it will be counterproductive for the HRV. Intermittent fasting has also been found to increase HRV but extended fasting reduces it. So some aspects of daily time restricted eating probably is beneficial but too long or if you're getting again getting too much sympathetic tone from the fasting then that's not beneficial. And there is for walking almost like a linear association with HRV, the more steps you take per day the higher the HRVEEs even up to sixteen, eighteen thousand steps. So yeah, these are the ones I think will be most beneficial and I think from my own personal experience then fasting and sauna and exercise are the biggest the three biggest things that has increased my HIV. Next question, do you ever cheat meals like pizza or ice cream? So the answer is, you know, if I want to then I'll do it. So the key here is that I'm not gonna be doing some sort of cheat meals or something like that every day and or eat it. So if you have moderation in your food choices including cheat meals then it's not inherently going to be harmful for you. You're going to be a getaway you will be able to get away with it. Yeah. The key is just making sure that you're not like doing it consistently all the time and, what I like to do is just look at the biomarkers. You know, if you're having some sort of a cheat meal once a week and your biomarkers are not very good, then it means that you have some things to work on and I wouldn't do like the cheat meal. I would try to optimize my biomarkers before that. And, vice versa if you if your blood markers are perfect and you're lean and healthy and fit, you're exercising then, you know, having a cheat meal once a week or something like that isn't going to jeopardize your progress and it's not going to worsen your blood markers either, you know. In some people it might then I would be more careful with that But, yeah. If it doesn't worsen your blood markers, if you're still lean and healthy or strong then, yeah. I wouldn't think that it's inherently harmful. Next question, Azteaxanthin blocks five alpha reductase, does it pave way for more estrogen? So five alpha reductase is the enzyme that converts testosterone into DHT, which is the strongest kind of steroid hormone in the body, which, you know, is beneficial for muscle growth, but it's also involved obviously in prostate cancer and hair loss. Now, Astaxanthin blocking five alpha reductase, is it going to convert it into more estrogen? Then logically, no. So like just or there's no evidence that it would do so and there's actually evidence that the asteaxanthin actually might increase testosterone levels as well. So there's actually at least one clinical trial where the combination of astaxanthin and saw palmetto extract resulted in greater testosterone levels in men. So, you know, if you if you're looking at the, yeah, like the mechanistic pathways, then you might come to the conclusion of that, but there's no like, at least right now, no evidence of that and blocking that five alpha reductase, you know, actually might be from a longevity perspective, might be more beneficial. So, yeah, for men at least. So next question, I don't take collagen, but I take thirty five grams of glycine per day. Is it enough for collagen synthesis? So thirty five grams of glycine per day, that's more than you would get from a collagen supplement. So if you take ten grams of collagen, then you're only getting three grams of glycine from there. So, yeah, you'll be getting ten grams more or 11 times more 11 times more glycine from this glycine stack than the collagen. Now glycine is one of the most important amino acids in collagen synthesis and I think you would see some benefits potentially. The thing is that the collagen peptides have like unique bioavailability and unique absorption that probably isn't replicated by glycine alone. So, at least from the studies then the collagen peptides are the ones that do work and, you know, glycine supports collagen synthesis. You know, we might eventually get some studies like looking at glycine supplementation and skin antiaging or or whatnot. But, yeah, I I just prefer to base the decision on okay what are the studies out there right now. So right now we have the clinical trials on collagen peptides that they work for skin antiaging and and that's what I would still use. Now you can still use the glycine for the other reasons. So you still want to get more glycine than from the collagen peptides alone. You wanna get the glycine for glutathione. You want to get glycine for creatinine synthesis, bile acid synthesis, bile salt synthesis, a heme synthesis. So, yeah. There's many reasons why you wanna get more glycine and lastly, you also wanna get the glycine for the methionine balance. So most people are getting too much methionine and excess methionine, you know, increases visceral fat. It might worsen insulin sensitivity and in animals it does also shortens their lifespan. So reducing that like or achieving a better glycine and methionine balance by increasing glycine intake, I think is beneficial for most people. Next question, what are your opinions on the supplement pterostilbene for longevity? So pterostilbene, it's another stilbenoid which is in the same family as resveratrol and, it's thought to have, like, similar effects as resveratrol. And the only difference is that terrostilbene has greater bioavailability than resveratrol. Some some people might think that it's even better than resveratrol. Now the problem is that, there's not a lot of clinical trials on pterostil being yet. It has much less evidence than, resveratrol and there's no evidence that it's going to extend lifespan in animals, either. So the few clinical trials that are still being have shown that it's kind of safe or orally tolerable, but it does reduce HDL cholesterol and increase LDL cholesterol as well and in one of the studies they found that pterostilbene supplementation reduced blood pressure while increasing LDL cholesterol. So I think the totality of evidence just shows that, I mean there's no real benefit to pterostilbene as of now. So, you know, it even increases LDL, which I wouldn't say is like a positive thing, especially if it, reduces HDL at the same time. So, yeah, I wouldn't take there are still being I think it's, yeah, pretty pretty kind of useless based on the evidence right now. Next question, essential supplements for vegans. So there are, you know, like only a handful supplements that you're definitely going to benefit from if you are on a vegan diet. There, you know, b12. I think every vegan should take like a b12 supplement. Most omnivores are also actually b12 deficient and the most reliable method to prevent that is to take like a b12 supplement, especially if you are on a plant based or vegan diet and And the second supplement probably is like, creatine for vegans. So, yes, your body makes a certain amount of creatine. You can make some creatine from, glycine, but, you know, a vegan diet doesn't contain that much glycine and it's much easier to just supplement three to five grams of creatine. You're getting, you know, way more even than you would on a on a carnivore diet. So it's hard to get five grams of of creatine even on a carnivore diet unless you're eating something like four kilograms of meat or two kilograms of herring, something like that. So, even vegans and omnivores both would benefit from from a creatine supplementation. And the last one I would maybe Yeah. Like, So it's not a Yeah, so the problem is there's no vegan collagen supplement and you're obviously not getting any collagen from your foods either if you're on a vegan diet. You are also not getting a lot of methionine from the vegan diet, so your demand for glycine is also theoretically lower, but I think most vegans still would benefit from increasing glycine. So just taking glycine because you can't take collagen, I would just take, you know, ten, fifteen grams of glycine as a supplement if you are a vegan. So these three I think are the best, b twelve, creatine and glycine. Next question, in your opinion, what's the best way to prevent cancer? So cancer is a unfortunate disease because, you know, you could be otherwise healthy and not visibly sick kind of and still get cancer, whereas, you know, if you're over overweight and and not exercising etcetera then, you know, you know you're increasing your risk of heart disease and diabetes and Alzheimer's. Whereas with cancer is something I get like even like relatively healthy and visibly healthy people can still get cancer. So I think the most important thing to prevent cancer is to do routine checkups just to go to your doctor and ask for checkups for, certain cancers and, you know, obviously there's different tests to do and detecting the cancer early enough is the most powerful way to avoid it getting serious. So and early detection is, you know, the key here. And it also depends a lot on your age group. So if you're 20 then your doctor is never going to like do some sort of a cancer checkup for you. Unless there's something wrong in your blood work or some other like serious health conditions that you might have. So yes, like you should try to start let's say monitoring certain key biomarkers for that and doing like routine checkups, you know, definitely in your forties, starting in your forties. Next question, how do we improve skin elasticity? So skin elasticity, the supplements, suppleness of the skin declines with age and you know collagen supplementation, collagen peptide supplementation has been found to increase skin elasticity. Skin hydration also declines with age and for that the hyaluronic acid supplementation has also been found to support that skin hydration as well as skin elasticity. So the best skin and aging supplements that I think have been proven to work are collagen peptides, hyaluronic acid and, astaxanthin. So astaxanthin at twelve milligrams a day also, first of all it protects your skin against UV radiation and it also has been found to support skin elasticity. So yeah, these are the supplements I'm taking and I think do work. And you know drinking regular water, sleeping enough and having a good diet, those all those things are also obviously quite important. And last question is do periods of calorie deficit harm your exercise performance? The most logical answer is yes because if you are, you know, not eating enough food, you're kind of under nourished and deprived of energy, then yeah, you're not going to be performing at your peak or not at your best. And, you know, there's certainly a lot of, like, truth to the idea that under eating calories will make you lose muscle and make you lose strength. But what they find in these calorie trials, these two year random control trials on calorie restriction, is that the calorie restriction does reduce muscle size, but, your muscle strength stays relatively the same and kind of the quality of the muscle increases, So your muscles have, like, less volume, but they're, like, fiber fiber for fiber or stronger based on the volume, so to say. Like, it's just just the ratio of strength the muscle increases or the quality of the muscle increases because, you're just carrying less muscle mass in that sense. So I I think, you know, prolonged calorie restriction, yeah, like if you're under calorie restriction for years, you will lose some strength, you will lose some muscle mass, but you can maintain it quite adequately. Granted that you're doing some form of resistance training and you're eating enough protein. So, the resistance training is the biggest factor for muscle strength and muscle mass and to maintain it especially. So if you are ever in a calorie deficit then you should always do some form of resistance training. You don't want to go crazy with it because if you're like very catabolic with your exercise, you're just lifting weights for hours every day then you will lose muscle and strength because of that. But moderate, like amounts of resistance training with still pretty high intensity, that will be the best for maintaining muscle. So what I like to look is that yes, I'm gonna reduce my weight a little or I'm expecting to lose a little bit of strength, so I'm having to reduce the weight I lift by maybe five kilos, but I'm not going to be starting to lift half the weight I used to because that's a signal for your body that it doesn't need the muscle strength anymore and you're going to lose the strength much more. So you still want to perform as like intensely as you were before the calorie restriction, but you can just, you know, naturally expect to lose maybe five to 10% of your strength. With cardiovascular exercise, it they find that it doesn't, you know, hinder cardiovascular or VA two max performance that much. Of course you're not going to be like an elite level athlete by being in a calorie deficit all the time, but, the cardiovascular fitness inherently isn't going to be damaged or suffer. It's not gonna suffer from a calorie restriction and it might actually improve it because you lose weight. So you like, you know, run faster a little bit because you carry less weight. So or a little bit because you carry less weight. So yeah, exercise in a calorie deficit saves a lot of things. So if you're in the calorie deficit without any exercise, you're gonna lose a lot of muscle mass and muscle strength and endurance as well. But if you keep exercising, you keep lifting weights and I would add eating a high protein diet at the same time, that's the best thing, like a lot of the fitness competitors, they eat super high protein, they lift weights and they're in a very high calorie deficit, so they lose like, you know, all the fat, they lose a lot of fat in the process, but they're still pretty strong, you know, they're not as strong as they're if they're bulking, but they're still strong relatively speaking when we're talking about or if you compare them to, like, the average people. So, yeah. High protein exercise, lifting weights and cardio while in a calorie deficit is is is very good to do and it will maintain most of the physical performance that you had before. Alright. That's it for this q and a. If you want to ask me a question in the future, then make sure you follow me on Instagram at simlund. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like and subscribe. My name is sim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.