Are there any supplements you can take to reverse aging? Now there are a lot of controversial opinions about this topic and there are a lot of supplements that you could take, but there aren't many supplements that have actual data showing that they have reversed some aspects of the hallmarks of aging or actually reversing the epigenetic age as measured by epigenetic age tests. But there are a few supplements out there that indeed have some evidence backing that up. So in this q and a episode, we're gonna cover this question and many others. If you want to ask me a question, then make sure you follow me on Instagram at simlun. So the first question is, are there any supplements that can actually reverse aging? So far, there's not no evidence that, actual age reversal is possible so that you can't really go from actual age reversal is possible so that you can't really go from a older adult into a younger adult. Like, yes, you can improve your biomarkers, you can lose weight, you can become fitter, you can increase your VA to max, you can go from a VA to max of a 60 year old to VA to max of a 20 or 30 year old, whatever, but there's no actual evidence that you can literally, like, reverse the aging process and become, like, phenotypically, like a younger individual. Of course, there's a lot of, different opinions about that, and some people think it is possible. Some people think think that it is already proven. And there are some, like, cell studies even, like, by David Sinclair that he's done the cellular reprogramming recently where they have, like, reversed quote unquote, the biological age of these cells using, like, the Yamanaka factors which are these transcription factors that, can affect, like, epigenetics and longevity. So I don't agree that there are literal supplements that can make you younger in terms of turning back the clock literally. But I do think that there are supplements shown to, like, improve many hallmarks of aging, like reverse the signs, visible signs of aging, reverse the decline in function that happens with aging such as your cognition and other vital markers etc. And this is what I'll be covering right now. So my premise is that you can't like directly reverse aging but you can reverse or, like reduce the age related decline that happens with age. The first study is from 2019 and they looked at a collection of supplements for trying to regenerate the thymus. The thymus is an organ located in the chest that's important for the immune system. The supplements they used were low dose of human growth hormone, metformin, DHEA, which is a testosterone precursor, and vitamin d three. The participants saw a reduction in their inflammation levels as well as improvement in kidney function. After one year of using the protocol, they saw a one point five year reduction in their epigenetic age. And by the end of the study, it was minus two point five years compared to the control group. First of all, a very interesting study and I think that targeting one specific organ is a very smart way of going about it because or at least, you know, it's actually, you can see that, okay, this will affect one specific organ. You can't really take, like, broader conclusions from just this one organ because aging is a multi organ, phenomenon. Like, you have to actually look at the entire body. The epigenetic age tests or the clocks themselves obviously are also controversial. Many people think that they're nonsense. Other people think that they are at least giving some insight into aging. I personally think that they can be very useful for sure. And, what matters more is, like, the actual outcome of, you know, does the person's immune system actually improve? Does the other vital markers related to the immune system, etcetera, improve? Which in this case, was true. About the supplements then, obviously, some of the easier ones like Metformin, DHEA, and and vitamin d three, we have talked about, quite often on this channel. Metformin is, obviously something that younger individuals probably wouldn't benefit from or if they don't have diabetes. If you're someone who has diabetes, metformin is very beneficial. If you're younger, then taking metformin probably has has, like, net negative effects because it reduces your UTmax, it might reduce your testosterone, it might reduce your, muscle growth capacity, etcetera. So for younger non diabetic individuals, it's a negative. Someone who has diabetes obviously will have a lot of benefits. DHEA is another, like, interesting one. Testosterone precursor, you know, it certainly will improve quality of life. It can increase your testosterone levels if your testosterone levels are low. Again, for younger individuals, it probably has little to no effect. But for someone who has low testosterone or who is, older and they're experiencing age related decline in testosterone, then for them DHEA might bring them back up to more youthful levels, with their testosterone. Now growth hormone is another one of those things that is a bit more controversial. Like, I personally wouldn't take growth hormone even if I'm old, at least not based on the current evidence because, you know, mechanistically speaking, growth hormone is involved in aging. Like, it actually promotes aging. It's one of the more most, like, conserved, pathways of aging in some sense or longevity pathways. Again, it might improve the thymus regeneration, which obviously is very important. And with age, you see a decline in immune system function, you see an increase in immunosenescence, and by and a lot of it is mediated through the decline in your thymus function. So it's the thymus is something that ages quite rapidly compared to other organs. So if you can regenerate it and bring it back to a more youthful level, then, in some ways or, you know, theoretically speaking, you will also increase your health span by staying healthier, by having a stronger immune system. But again, like, it kinda depends on the dose, depends on the individual, depends how long they're doing it, but I personally wouldn't like touch growth hormone without the reason, if that makes sense. The second supplement on the list is creatine. Everyone knows the benefits of creatine for sports performance, but it also has a lot of brain health and cognitive benefits. Now while there are no direct studies that I'm aware of showing how creatine can reverse biological age measured by the epigenetic age test. I do think that creatine has plenty of evidence suggesting that it, maintains more youthful aspects of physical performance and mental performance as well. And there's many other things there as well that have been seen to improve with creatine supplementation like glucose tolerance and, sleep. Like, you you're able to, like, get away with less sleep, which is important from the perspective of longevity and, aging. So I think there's just so much research about creatine that it works and it works pretty much in many aspects, like your muscle strength, muscle mass, bone density, cognition, brain health and exact even like in some of the neurodegeneration models, they see that creatine supplementation helps to, like, counteract some of that pathology as well as in elderly people, supplementing creatine has been seen to improve memory. So, yes, like from a functional side, not necessarily from, like, the biological age test side, but from a functional side there's a lot of evidence showing that creatine does, quote unquote, to reverse aging by bringing you more to a youthful state in terms of your physical function, fitness, and your mental function or like cognition. I wanna briefly mention about the David Sinclair's work that he's recently published, regarding the epigenetic reprogramming of, actually reversing cells into more youthful state in terms of their, biological clock or epigenetic clock. Now that's a very controversial study. They didn't do anything, like, groundbreaking or they didn't do actual anything new. They just used the Yamanaka factors that have been previously already shown to reverse or region or, like, revert the biological age of cells already before. There's no human studies yet proving that, and, David Sinclair has said that you can use certain supplements to get the same effects or not necessarily said, but he's, like, you know, alluded to the fact. And he has a new supplement company as well, Tally Health, that sells Vitality, which is their supplement. And the ingredients are calcium alpha ketoglutarate, quercetin, transresorotrol, fisetin, and spermidine. Now the vitality blend doesn't have any, like, randomised clinical trials proving that it, like, reverses biological age or anything like that. Some of those specific ingredients do. So for example, calcium alpha ketoglutarate in a 2021 study, they did find that Rejuvant, which was calcium alpha ketoglutarate plus vitamin d, they found an eight year reduction in biological age after seven months using the TrueAge DNA methylation test. Now this is just one study and obviously the company who has the Rejuvant patent, you know, they published the study or they made the study, so it's obviously have to take with a grain grain of salt. There's no other studies yet that have repeated that finding. So I personally I think I think calcium alpha ketoglutarate is interesting. It is certainly one of the few supplements that has actual data suggesting that it reverses biological age by the DNA methylation tests. Whatever that means, that depends, you know, depends on who you're talking to. But at least we have some studies that they have reversed that number. Now how relevant that number is, again, is very, you know, controversial and up to debate, but, it's at least one of the few supplements that has that kind of data. Alpha ketoglutarate is like a metabolic mediator. It's important for the Krebs cycle, the energy production, and alpha ketoglutarate levels do decline with age. Now the other ingredients like quercetin, trans resveratrol, fisetin and spermidine, those don't have any evidence of age reversal. There's obviously a lot of controversy about resveratrol. I think by now you can say that resveratrol doesn't extend lifespan even in animal studies. There's the recent NIH study on fisetin as well that failed to show life extension effects. Quercetin is senolytic as is fisetin and they can help with senescent cells. But with senescent cells, not all senescent cells are bad. You don't want to eliminate them all because senescent cells are also involved in wound healing. So you need some senescent cells. You don't wanna wipe them out, completely. And lastly, spermidine is a supplement that, I think has failed as well. A 2023 randomized placebo controlled trial found that high dose spermidine supplementation didn't even increase the spermidine levels in blood plasma and the saliva. Another 2022 randomized clinical trial on the elderly found that spermidine long term spermidine supplementation in participants with subjective cognitive decline didn't modify memory and biomarkers compared to placebo. Now dietary spermidine I think has quite a lot of benefits. There are a few studies finding that dietary spermidine intake is associated with reduced mortality, reduced heart disease, lower blood pressure, and that kind of thing. But there's no evidence that supplemental spermidine would even, like, be beneficial in any way, at least not not right now. So I think that you should definitely get your spermidine from dietary sources, from whole food ingredients. Things like chlorella, mushrooms, wheat germ, wheat bran, cheese, even like beef has smaller amounts, but the highest sources are wheat germ, chlorella, and wheat bran. And lastly, the supplements that I think all of you already know about, which is glycine and NAC, glynaq, there's multiple randomized trials, randomized control trials showing that the glynaq combo reverses hallmarks of aging like muscle strength, gait speed, cognition, incidence, sensitivity, body composition, all those things improve in the elderly people. Now I'm not going to go into detail in this video because you've already seen multiple videos me talking about it. If you haven't then check out the the longevity playlist in the description and you'll find the videos there. This episode is brought to you by alitura naturals. Alitura brings you the best natural skin care products for radiating skin and antiaging. Regular skin care products are full of ingredients and fillers that actually cause more harm than good. Alitura uses only active ingredients sourced and handcrafted in Hawaii. Their products contain zero fillers. The allitura night cream received the twenty twenty one clean shirt beauty awards for best face cream. Allitura also has skin moisturizers, clay mask, serums, and cleansers. Head over to allitura.com and use the code seam, s I I m, for a 20% discount. Alright. Let's continue on with the rest of the q and a. Next question, do you still have your 30 grams of protein shake on your non training days? So, yes, my daily diet has still stayed relatively the same. I'll have a protein shake with around 30 even like up to 40 grams of protein before my workout and I'll work out and then I'll have dinner the rest of my calories. So it's like a modified one meal a day. Now there's, the recent study that we talked about on the channel as well where they found that a 100 grams of protein post workout yielded superior results than 25 grams of, protein. I think that's, kind of supports my experience at least. That's what I've seen. Like, I've never had issues with putting on muscle. I've never actually wanted to put on muscle that much either. I've never, like, solely focused on muscle hypertrophy. I've mostly focused on, like, muscle strength and just fitness in general, but I've never had, like, a plateau in terms of, being able to put on size as long as I'm in a calorie surplus. And having smaller protein ingestion before training is beneficial for reducing muscle catabolism and then ingesting larger amounts of protein after the workout, I believe, yes, at least in this based on the study, it yielded the superior anabolic response that lasted for a lot longer time, up to twelve hours. Now the criticism for that study was that they used this, milk protein which is casein and slower to digest. Now I talked with the author of, the study on email and he said the reason they used milk protein is that, yes, the re the specific reason they used milk protein was that it's it's slower to digest. And if you're in a real world, then all the foods that you eat are slower to digest. None of the foods, whatever you're eating like, meat, potatoes, beans, eggs, whatever, they're all slower to digest than whey protein. Because whey protein is super fast to digest, so you can't really compare the findings from those studies where they use whey protein shakes to actual real world where you're eating whole foods that are slower to digest. So that's why they use the milk protein. And milk protein kinda mimicked the aspect of a real meal, so to say that it takes a longer time, to digest. So at least based on my experience, that's what I'm gonna keep doing. And I think that having larger amounts of protein in the post workout window makes sense at least, for a younger individual. Maybe not for, like, a older individual, for them, it makes sense to spread it out a little bit to maintain better anabolism. But, at least you don't have to be worried about, oh, I need to have three to four protein ingestions per day. There's I think for the younger individual, there's no reason, to do that. Next question, are benefits of glycine and other antiaging supplements related to their ability to decrease methylation? So not necessarily. So methylation is the process of moving methyl groups around. DNA methylation is the, methyl groups attaching to DNA and regulating epigenetics. There are some longevity supplements that have beneficial effects of methylation by increasing methylation. You know, like TMG is a very good methyl donor. Glycine is also a methyl donor, and, even creatine has those properties b 12. So I think with methylation, it comes down to like, you know, it's another bell curve situation. Hypo methylation, which is under methylation is bad and, hypermethylation, over methylation is also bad. So it mostly is the like, the best, sweet spot is somewhere in the middle. So you don't wanna be necessarily taking large amounts of methyl donors, but if you are hypomethylating or if you're not getting enough methyl donors from a diet, then, they are beneficial. So it's never more is better or it's never that this is good or bad. It's, you know, the body mostly functions best in, in like, homeostasis or, in balance. Next question, does it impact glucose in which order you eat your food? Hashtag glucose queen. So I think you're referring to the glucose goddess, and her information about going through specific order of foods. So generally, yes, if you drink a glass of soda, which is pure sugar and no fiber and no protein and no fats, then your glucose is going to, yeah, rise much higher than if you were to eat vegetables and protein first. So from that perspective, it makes sense to, yeah, eat the lower glycemic and protein rich foods first before you introduce the carbohydrates. I agree with, that, you know, how relevant it is depends on the person and the situation. So for example, if I'm coming from a hard workout of being completely fasted, my glycogen is very low, then for for me in that situation, it might be actually better to drink liquid sugar or, to consume carbohydrates like potatoes or rice or whatever it is. Is because it's going to replenish my glycogen. It's not and it's not going to have pretty much any significant effect on my blood sugar response because my body will just shuttle, those that glucose into the muscle glycogen. Whereas someone who has diabetes and they are, let's say, with worse glucose tolerance, then for them it's more important to have, like, a fiber and protein first before, eating carbohydrates. So it depends a lot on the individual and normal it's very normal for your blood sugar to go up and down. The problem is when it goes up and stays elevated. That's like insulin resistance. Your body isn't able to produce insulin to lower the blood sugar, levels. So, depends a lot on the situation. Generally, normal person doesn't have to worry about the big fluctuations in your blood sugar unless you are, yeah, like just having a massive amount of cake or something like that. So in that case, it might be more beneficial to use things that lower the blood sugar response like apple cider vinegar has been shown to do it up to, like, 30 to 50%. You can use Berberine. You can use some other glucose disposal agents agents. So, yeah, there's things that you can do to control the blood sugar response, but it but having a small increase and then a comedown in your blood sugar is normal and there's no, like, nothing to really worry about it. The problem is, yeah, when it goes up and stays elevated. Next question, what are the healthiest and least toxic seafood options? So seafood generally is, yeah, very nutritious. It has a lot of vitamins and minerals and also high in omega three fatty acids, which are important for the brain and heart health. But, yeah, the unfortunate issue is that a lot of seafood is polluted due to the environmental pollution and even a lot of the seafood contains microplastics and stuff like that. So it's not yet, like, the most cleanest pristine food. And pretty much all the seafood is affected to a certain extent because the ocean is or it's, you know, all connected. The ocean is an open body of water and all the, like, pollutants go into there. So over time, the fish and other life forms, they accumulate whatever, like heavy metals or microplastics into them. So one easy way to avoid that is to not eat the larger type of fish that accumulate more of the heavy metals over the course of their lifetime. So like tuna, swordfish and, these other bigger fish, those are generally higher in heavy metals. Smaller fish like sardines, herring, sprouts, those things, they're they die before or, you know, they are much smaller as well, so they accumulate less of these heavy metals. So that's an easy, fix. Salmon is something, you know, interesting. In some sense, the formed salmon, is in some sense cleaner. It has less heavy metals because it's not in open water, so to say. But at the same time, the farmed salmon is still fed, a pretty crappy diet, and, the omega three profile of farmed salmon isn't very healthy either. So and then even then, you can make the argument that, yes, the fish and seafood contains heavy metals, but they also contains these different minerals that support glutathione production like selenium and other, you know, these nutrients that help you to actually detox from the heavy metals and, etcetera. So, you know, if you're eating only tuna, then that's probably not a smart idea. You're gonna get a lot of heavy metals. Like, I think Tony Robbins in the past I heard that he ate a lot of tuna and he saw his blood test and his mercury levels were, like, sky high. So, you know, you can easily avoid this mistake by not eating only tuna or only swordfish or only fish for that matter. So if you diversify your protein sources, then you can easily avoid that. And, if you eat, let's say, fish a few times per week, then that's already enough to get some of these omega threes and other vitamins and minerals. I I much rather take, like, omega three supplement, as well as a insurance policy to get because you're not gonna get the required amount of omega three fats from just the fish anyway. Like the optimal amount is up to like two point five grams of EPA DHA per day. Whereas if you eat human fish every day you might get like one point five grams per day from just the fish. And you would need to eat a lot of fish. So at that point it becomes a bit more, let's say, harder to counteract, like, the heavy metal side. Next question, thoughts on taking vitamin c on cardio days and muscle adaptation. Large amounts of antioxidants after resistance training has been shown pretty repeatedly to blunt the hypertrophy response at least. So you're going to build less muscle if you take antioxidants after lifting weights. Now the same doesn't apply to cardio because cardio is a different adaptation and, there's actually a lot of evidence that antioxidants improve, you know, cardio respiratory, let's say, fitness and recovery as well. So if you're doing cardio, then ice baths and taking antioxidants is actually a good thing because it speeds up recovery and even helps with some adaptations. Maybe not, like, very large amounts of antioxidants just for the sake of hormesis because you do still want to, not only improve, like, the exercise performance, but you also want to, get the other beneficial adaptations from exercise, like the immune system adaptations, resilience and those kind of things. So you don't wanna, like, blunt the hormetic signal. So you don't wanna eliminate the reactive oxygen species even if you're doing cardio. So, depends on, like, do you need fast recovery and what's your other diet like? So if you're eating different kinds of vegetables and fruits and berries, then chances are you don't need additional vitamin c supplement. If you're someone who does multiple workouts per day or like every day pretty much strenuous workouts and you need to recover fast, then yes, take an ice bath to recover faster from the cardio. And then in the evening, you have the lifting session, etcetera, then you're recovered faster. And the same with antioxidants, with vitamin c. You can take the vitamin c after the first workout of the day and then the second workout, you're more recovered. Or if you want to prepare for tomorrow's workout faster and you don't care about muscle growth or muscle hypertrophy at that point, then yes, you can take the vitamin c. But on a regular basis, it's not the best to blunt the, the stress response or the inflammation from the exercise. Next question, if you work out six days a week but a volume matches a three day full body, is it the same for longevity? I think it's good to move every day, at least walk every day, at least get, you know, the research shows that up to 12,000 steps a day is associated with the lowest mortality risk. So walking 12,000 steps a day every day is a very good thing to do regardless if you exercise or not. Now when you're talking about actual exercise, then there does appear to be some j shaped curve at least with resistance training, which I've talked about in some videos as well, that no resistance training is bad associated with increased risk. Doing like a moderate amount is the lowest risk, but doing too much, is associated with higher risk. So I think if you do, like resistance training and you lift weights two to three times per week, then that's already going to give you the maximum benefits for longevity and mortality risk reduction. You're not going to probably see additional benefits, beyond that, and it might be actually increasing the risk or providing, like, these diminishing returns, at least based on the recent meta analysis on that topic. When it comes to moderate exercise, so zone two cardio, hiking, speed walking, those kind of things, gardening, then that fine then the evidence shows that the more of those things you do, the lower your risk of mortality is. So the more you walk, the more you garden, the more you hike, the lower your risk of mortality generally is. So this moderate type of physical exercise somewhere around zone one, zone two. But going above that zone three, zone four, zone five, that starts to provide diminishing returns. Now if you work out six times a week and the duration is the same as three times per week, then probably you wouldn't see any difference. Maybe from a nervous system perspective, you might eventually start to feel a bit more fatigued if you don't have any days off because, you know, remember that the adaptation occurs when you're resting. So if you're never resting your everyday, you're like triggering the stimulus, then your body is always repairing itself but it's never adapting. It's always repairing itself enough to prepare for the next workout but it never has enough time to adapt and become stronger and more resilient, if that makes sense. So it's always repairing but it's never adapting if you're just having everyday, even short periods of intense workouts. So I think having a few rest days in between is a smart idea, but if you're doing like moderate intensity in those days then you can get away with it. So what I like to do is, you know, day one heavy resistance training, day two either complete rest or something that is moderate or low intensity like hiking or longer walking, then again day three is gonna be some more intense resistance training, maybe zone two cardio and a bit longer and day four is gonna be another low intensity or rest day. So I'll like cycle between high intensity and low intensity, high intensity, low intensity or rest. So that gives your body enough time to recover. Whereas if you're overweight everyday high intensity, high intensity, high intensity, high intensity, then maybe rest, then your body unless you are like super athletic, unless you're like a professional athlete and you've been doing this for years, then then you might get away with it. But, for the average person then it is more beneficial to have a few days off. And what you might see is that you actually just start to build more muscle as well as a result of that because your body actually has the time to recover and adapt, if that makes sense. Next question, is lysine and proline supplementation equally important as glycine supplementation? Glycine, hydroxyproline and proline are the three amino acids of collagen. Collagen is 30% glycine, so that's why glycine is and and glycine is also the rate limiting step in collagen synthesis. So glycine is more important than hydroxyproline and proline, and chances are you're getting hydroxyproline and proline from other foods as well in plenty amounts whereas the demand for glycine is much higher because glycine is also used for other things like glutathione and creatine synthesis. So you need more glycine than hydroxyproline and proline. So there's no reason to take hydroxyproline and proline and chances are you're getting enough of them from the diet whereas with the glycine is not really the case. You might, you know, benefit from some supplementation or if you're eating a lot of glycine then then that's not necessary, which is unlikely unless you're eating like pork skins and and those kind of things. With lysine, lysine is not part of the collagen and I don't think that there's no reason to take, lysine as well and, you're probably getting it from the dietary sources. Next question, should I worry if I don't move much after my post dinner snack? So a snack, probably not. So if you're having a food, a smaller meal that has 200, 300 calories, then probably not like a small pre bed snack like cottage cheese and berries or something like that. That that's fine. It's not going to because the food volume itself is also gonna be small and the calories are also relatively small. Now if you're having, like, a bigger dinner, then, it would be better to move a little bit by going for, like, a ten minute walk even. It's gonna be enough to improve the digestion and lower your blood sugar levels and and, yeah, make sure that you're not gonna be stuffed before bed. So I think, you know, you have your dinner, you walk ten to fifteen minutes, that's good. And if you have a snack later and you don't walk after that, then that's fine. Like, it's not gonna be that big of a deal. Of course, you have to measure your own sleep or measure how you feel by doing that. You know, if you feel worse, if your sleep score is worse by doing that, then of course, it is an issue. And you can then you can try, okay, I'm gonna go for a shorter maybe five, five or six minute walk and see what happens. Next question, advice if I want to start tracking my zone two and VO two max as a beginner. So the Polar heart rate monitor h 10, you just strap it around your chest, connect it to your phone and there you can just directly measure your heart rates and heart beats. So you so you can just see, okay, am I in zone two, zone one? Zone two is usually 60 to 70% of your maximum heart rate. So, the the app already will already tell you as well which zone are you in and that's like a very useful tool because, yeah, you know, you can assess through your nasal breathing whether or not you are in zone two. But sometimes, after a while, you can, like, you can kind of deceive yourself as like that you're running faster than e zone two and but you're still breathing through the nose because you've kinda gotten used to it. So, yeah, like, tracking the heart rate with the polar polar, heart rate monitor is the kind of the best way to do that. And, other than that, like, that's the pretty much the only tool you would need to do zone two. Of course, you don't need the heart rate monitor. You can, yeah, just pay attention to your nasal breathing, but it's a very useful tool. I think it's one of the best fitness tools, that you can use, for sure. There's also the Holo Habits, habit tracker that I'm partnered with and, they have difficult challenges that you can do. And my VO two Max challenge is part of, the app. So there I'll walk you through the different workouts and teach you how to increase your VO two Max in more detail so you can check it out. It's a hollow habits on the App Store of, on both the Apple App Store and the Google Play Store so you can check it out. The last question, how many grams of protein do you eat in a day? Right now, I'm probably eating around a 130 to a 150 grams of protein. So, my body weight is seventy nine kilograms. So for my body weight, that will be around 0.8 grams of protein per pound of body weight, which actually is the upper limit they see is needed for muscle hypertrophy. So beyond that, you don't see any additional muscle growth benefits and, you could even eat less. So that's why I'm between a hundred and thirty to a hundred and fifty. So I'll be getting, yeah, around 0.7 to 0.8 grams per pound of body weight of protein per day, which is perfectly it's like pretty much up there in terms of maximizing the benefits of protein on muscle growth. So you don't need to eat more than that. You could eat less than that, but it's not going to maximize the muscle growth benefits. And, yeah, that's perfectly fine for for me. Alright. That's it for this q and a. If you want to ask me a question, then make sure to follow me on Instagram at simlund. Other than Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click a like and subscribe. My name is Sim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.