My name is Simon and today we're doing another q and a. The first question is what are some supplements that can affect your muscle growth in a negative way? I've mentioned several times in my videos and in my books as well that doing some sort of like severe anti inflammatory intervention after a resistance training workout specifically has been found to be associated with reduced muscle growth and it could also affect, like, strength gains in a negative way slightly. There's no evidence that it's going to apply to endurance exercise, but muscle growth per se, does appear to be, like, negatively affected by massive anti inflammatory interventions after a workout. So cold baths, like ice baths for several minutes are gonna be doing that. A cold shower probably isn't strong enough for that, but the same applies to some of these anti inflammatory supplements, specifically like vitamin c, vitamin e, NAC is also in this category and all these like non steroidal anti inflammatory drugs like aspirin, ibuprofen, etcetera. They can also affect your muscle growth in a negative if you take it after a workout. Now there are some other supplements as well that could have effects on, you know, other parts of gains or other aspects of physical performance. So resveratrol is, something that has been found to reduce VO2 max and, possibly also, like, testosterone levels in elderly men specifically. So, it's one of those supplements that you, you know, really don't wanna take even before the workout if your goal is, like, VO2max or optimal testosterone levels. Metformin isn't a supplement, but it's a pharmaceutical and it has, like, similar findings that it can affect VO2max in a negative way and, also lower testosterone levels. But most important is, like, these anti inflammatory supplements, vitamin c, vitamin e, vitamin e, beta carotene possibly, and, NAC are the most, like, common supplements that might have this kind of effect. But the most potent effect will probably come from this NSAIDs, aspirin, ibuprofen, etcetera. Another follow-up question was, can azeaxanthin affect muscle growth? There is quite interesting studies about azeaxanthin having a positive effect on testosterone levels, not in all studies. So it's kind of, you know, not completely clear if it has that effect. But, in a few studies they do find that azoaxanthin has a positive effect on testosterone levels. Now azoaxanthin also has been found to reduce aspects of muscle damage after a workout. So people who are doing high intensity exercise, soccer or some other like high intensity sports, they find that their muscle damage and muscle soreness is, lower when they're taking Astaxanthin. Now I'm not sure if this can also affect muscle growth in a negative way because, yeah, like reducing inflammation, having an antioxidant effect, they can be counterproductive for muscle growth. So I haven't found any study linking asteaxanthin supplementation to lower muscle growth or in inhibition of muscle growth, But it does reduce muscle damage which can be great for if you're wanting to recover from the exercise faster, but it can be also more like suboptimal if your goal is muscle hypertrophy. And interestingly, omega threes, omega three supplements, they actually find that it helps with muscle growth. So supplementing with omega threes actually has been found to be associated with higher muscle growth, especially in the elderly people. So it's kind of interesting that, omega omega threes, they have anti inflammatory effects, but, they don't appear to have a negative effect on muscle growth. Regardless, in my opinion, the best time to take anti inflammatory supplements is either before a workout or not on the days that you're doing resistance training with the goal of muscle growth. So, you can take anti inflammatory supplements, NAC, vitamin c, vitamin e, or aspirin or whatever it is, but, do it on not on the days that you're lifting weights. Next question, gelatin powder instead of glycine and can you drink, eat it as it is? So gelatin powder, regular beef gelatin powder is an excellent source of glycine. So, it's about like one fifth of it is gonna be glycine. So if you're having a 100 grams of gelatin powder, then about 20 grams of it is a glycine, which is a large amount. But at the same time, of course, you're not gonna be eating the gelatin powder with a spoon. You know, maybe you are. You're like a different breed in that case. But, you know, technically you could just, yeah, eat the gelatin powder with a spoon and you will be getting the glycine. Your body will absorb the glycine. I guess the easier or tastier way to consume gelatin powder would be to just make Jell O out of it so you can use gelatin powder to make your actual dessert jello with some berries or some fruits or something else that kind of sweetens the taste, then you have a very healthy and high glycine dessert. So I make it myself quite frequently. But, if I don't have time to wait several hours to make the Jell O, then I'll just mix it with maybe, like, yogurt or something else like that, and I'll still consume it in a, like, a favorable way. But, yes, it's a great source of getting lysine and, it can be used in a lot of, like, dishes. This episode is brought to you by Bone Charge, my favorite company for blue blocking glasses, red light therapy devices, and red light light bulbs. These items are essential for keeping your sleep wake on the cycles aligned in a world that tries to mess them up. Instead of looking at your phone before bed and letting the blue light disrupt your melatonin production, why not wear blue blockers instead that prevent that from happening? Instead of having your bedroom lit up with bright lights, use the more sleep friendly alternative by opting for flicker free red light light bulbs that don't disrupt your sleep. Boncharge also has amazing infrared sauna blankets that can give you the same health benefits as the traditional sauna. You also get the unique benefits of infrared light that improves joint and skin health. Head over to boncharge.com/seamland and use the code sim, s I I m, for a 15% discount. Next question. What superfoods do you recommend to consume daily? So this is gonna be somewhat of a not a complete answer because you know, what categorizes as a superfood is, you know, depends who you ask and depends what the goal is. I do think that there are certain foods that have been found to be universally beneficial with little to no side effects and, they have positive associations with health outcomes and, mechanistically as well, they have certain compounds or ingredients that elicit beneficial responses in the human body. So for example, I'll list a few of the ones that I, you know, consume myself on a regular basis, pretty much daily. And I do think that, everyone would benefit from. So number one would probably be eggs. So perfect amino acid profile, fairly bioavailable. And, it also has choline and also like these other carotenoids, lutein, zeaxanthin and stuff like that that actually are beneficial for the eyes and the brain. So, yeah. Eggs are like a really nice super food, I think. Then secondly would be olive oil, if you have extra virgin olive oil, high quality extra virgin olive oil, and, yeah, it's a high source of polyphenols. And there's just so much studies linking the consumption of olive oil with reduced risk of heart disease, reduced risk of Alzheimer's, and reduced risk of old causality. And the associations are pretty linear that, you know, the more olive oil you consume, the better the outcomes appear to be even between, like, moderate consumption versus high consumption. So the high consumption up to 56 grams a day appears to be better than, like, 10 grams of olive oil olive oil, per day. So, yeah, another one of these foods that I think has quite a lot of evidence and, like, a mechanistic studies as well that link to this, these outcomes. Now the yeah. The issue is that a lot of the olive oils in supermarkets tend to be mixed with some canola oil, but I guess here it's also important to appreciate some of the studies so that, you know, most of these studies, I I don't think these studies used this, you know, perfectly, well formulated, olive oil. They might have used just a regular olive oil from the supermarket. So it's hard to say, okay, even if these studies are done on people consuming olive oil that was mixed with some canola oil or something, then appear apparently it didn't jeopardize the results or the outcomes of these people. So I would say, yeah, like if you can find a good farm, like you establish some sort of a relationship with the farm and make sure that you are getting actual a 100% olive oil, then that's obviously the best option. But, and and at the same time buying the cheapest olive oil in the supermarket probably is not a good idea because it's, you know, very likely it's gonna be mixed with some canola oil, but, slightly more like higher quality, like more, I guess, believable brands, more established brands from the supermarket, they're gonna be, high quality enough to, at least based on the studies, to give, like health benefits to people consuming them on a regular basis. So I I wouldn't think you need to be like super crazy with the quality of your olive oil. Of course, if you can find the highest quality then, yeah, it's gonna be the best best option. Third superfood in my opinion would be dark chocolate or cacao. So, this also is a very high source of polyphenols and cacao consumption, specifically these flavonoids in cacao and dark chocolate. They appear to be linked to lower risk of heart disease and lower mortality as as well as specifically cardiovascular disease mortality. So I think, yeah, a dark chocolate is pretty pretty like a super food, if you could call it that. Now again, the issue is it's might be high in heavy metals, so you need to find a like an established brand preferably like, from a like a known source. But, if you can find high quality, cacao or raw cacao powder or high quality dark chocolates or anything above like 70% is is the goal, then that would have benefits as well on on, your heart health mostly. The fourth superfood isn't gonna be necessarily a superfood. I will put, like, coffee and green tea into this category. So, both of them have a lot of studies pointing that, consuming coffee or green tea is linked to lower risk of heart disease, Alzheimer's, liver cancer, diabetes and all cause mortality. So, yeah, people who consume these beverages appear to have better health. Now with green tea, yes, you could make the argument that it's healthy as a virus that, you know, if you are drinking green tea, then you're probably healthier as a person because, you know, most people don't like green tea. But with coffee, it's hard to say that it's healthy user bias because most people who drink coffee don't think it's healthy. Like, you know, my parents drink coffee and they think coffee is unhealthy. And, most you know, if you can draw like a Venn diagram between people who smoke and people who drink coffee, then almost everyone who smokes also drinks coffee. So it's hard to say that people who drink coffee are of this healthier people because there's a lot of there's a lot of, people in the mix of these studies that also follow unhealthier lifestyle habits or they're not particularly special with their lifestyle habits. So I wouldn't say that, yeah, coffee consumption is healthy as of us. Maybe with green tea it is. And I'm consuming, like, maybe two cups of coffee a day and green tea as well. One to two cups of green tea, per day. Now there's also, like, a bunch of other foods that could be on this list. You could put salmon, you could put a herring, which is, you know, the highest source of, creatine in the world. And it's also high in taurine and, omega threes and stuff like that. Beef, you can put into into here liver, you know, sweet potatoes, carrots, whatever. I mean, healthy food should be considered like super food instead. But, you know, not all these kind of foods would be people aren't something that people would consider to be super foods. So I think, yeah, healthy food is just going to have a positive effect on your health. And there's a lot of different kind of healthy foods out there. If you just stick to the whole food matrix, then most of these food could be categorized as superfoods. Because you yes, you could, you know, point out a specific ingredient in them like, you know, blueberries they're gonna have, these, anthocyanins and other kind of polyphenols that, have a positive effect on your health and they are linked to better health outcomes. So, yeah, like, you could pretty much pick a single ingredient or compound from any whole food and you can find some evidence to indicate that it will have some positive effects on your health. So, yeah. I'll just I guess I'll just cap cap the list. At this point, my my personal top superfoods that I consume on a daily basis would be, yeah, like eggs, olive oil, coffee, tea, and, some maybe some fish and, something something like that. Next question. What in your opinion are key supplements for women of 50 to take daily? Alright. So with age, there are obviously many changes that occur related to both aesthetics, physical function, cognitive function and overall aging. Now in your fifties, you are still, I guess, considered like a middle aged person, not an elderly person unfortunately. So, the you know, the supplements that are beneficial for someone in their fifties are very similar to someone in their forties and possibly sixties. Now there's gonna be obviously a lot different supplements if you're like seventies or eighties or at least more of like more benefits you would expect from these kind of supplements if you're the older you are. And the younger you are, they're gonna less supplements you technically, need for from an anti aging and longevity perspective. But I'll list like a few supplements that I think anyone, pretty much all of ages would benefit from, including the ones in their fifties. So collagen supplementation, collagen peptides, I think anyone everyone starting from the age of 20 would already benefit from collagen peptides because your skin collagen content starts decreasing already in your twenties and, collagen peptides have multiple clinical trials showing that it helps with skin antiaging and wrinkles and skin elasticity. So, you know, it's it has a aesthetic effect. It helps to slow down facial aging, but, the skin health or skin wrinkles maintaining skin elasticity is also important for, like, overall health and reducing the risk of, you know, other ailments. Like your skin is a massive organ and it's it's like a barrier as well against the outside world. So you would want to have good skin health for just overall longevity as well. Second supplement I think a woman in their fifties would benefit from is probably creatine. So, creatine is one of the most evidence based supplements there is, like hundreds, thousands of studies even, finding that it helps with muscle growth, muscle strength, speed, power and bone density as well, including cognition and brain. So in the elderly people supplementing creatine monohydrate is found to improve memory and, in everyone else, in all age groups, it also improves muscle strength and possibly muscle mass as well. The the effects is more for the muscle strength side. But, in your fifties already and as a female you would definitely wanna, you know, start thinking about maintaining muscle mass as much as possible into your elderly years. So creatine is a definitely one of those supplements virtually everyone of all age would benefit, but the older you get, the higher the importance becomes of getting extra creatine. Another supplement I think is worthwhile in your fifties would be glycine and NAC. So glycine and NAC also have several clinical trials showing that it helps with increasing glutathione levels, this is a master antioxidant, and this reduces inflammation and also affects multiple other hallmarks of aging, as well as improves functional outcomes like grip strength, walking speed, body composition and, those kind of things. And the gluathun starts declining somewhere in your mid forties. So in your fifties, you're like a prime target to start supplementing with NAC and glycine. But, when you're younger than that, it might not be that effective. Now NAC also has studies in lower doses and in younger people that it helps still with aspects of inflammation, maybe like liver enzymes. So, it is worthwhile to take as well. If you're younger, it's just not gonna have that big an effect and it might have a bigger effect if you have higher inflammation levels. But in your fifties, there's gonna be age related increase in inflammation called inflammation and age related decrease in glulathon. So, with age we are becoming more inflamed. Even the healthy elderly people, they have lower glulathon levels inflammation. So there's gonna be some inflammation occurring with aging the older you get and glycine NAC is one of the most effective supplements, against that. So a woman in the fifties might also be postmenopausal. So, you know, with menopause, the risk of osteoporosis increases a lot because of the drop in estrogen levels. So depends what have you been doing before menopause as a woman. So if you've been lifting weights, you've been eating a high protein diet, you've been eating enough calcium, and you have had adequate vitamin d levels all throughout your life, then chances are your bone density would be like normal or high. But, it would be like beneficial to do like a DXA scan or something like that to assess your bone density because, you know, a big risk for the elderly people is just hip fractures and falling. So accidental lifts, you know, the leading cause of accidental lift in the elderly people is, falling. So, you wanna make sure that you don't have low bone density. And after menopause, in your fifties, sixties, that's going to be one of the kind of the biggest leading causes of accidental deaths in people. So, yeah, calcium supplementation could be worthwhile in this scenario if you have low bone density. If you don't, then I wouldn't recommend taking a calcium supplement. But, yeah. It's, you know, high dose calcium supplementation over a thousand milligrams a day is actually, you know, linked to some aspects of heart disease and myocardial infarction. So you don't wanna take, like, you know, calcium in large amounts for no reason. But if you have low bone density and your calcium levels are low and you're not eating any dietary calcium, then, it it would be better to like like a small dose of calcium supplement as well. But yeah, only if you have low bone density in my opinion. Now there's also, like, a bunch of other supplements that you could take. You know, you could take Astaxanthin for, improving inflammation, improving blood pressure, improve improving metabolic syndrome, and protecting your skin against UV radiation. You could take some of these other carotenoids. You could take vitamin k two. You could take vitamin k one. You could take magnesium. So there's, you know, obviously a whole list of supplements you you could take, but, whether or not you need to or want to depends on, yeah, what's your health like, what's your biomarker is like because, yeah, some of these supplements are not gonna be worth it unless you have, you know, high inflammation or high cholesterol or high blood sugar or or whatever the case may be. So you can check out my free supplement list that I'm taking and I'm listing out some of these other supplements that, do work based on the evidence and, I guess the link is in the description. Next question, can you elaborate on what you do to treat elbow pain from lifting? So this is in response to my Instagram story where I was talking about them getting a little bit of, like, not not like any severe pain, but just like a nagging pain in my elbow, because of doing a bit of too like over enthusiastic muscle ups. So I was I've been training because I'm not muscle ups over the past few weeks. Usually in the summer when the weather is warm, I'm just, you know, working out outside mostly doing muscle ups. So I guess I was a bit too eager or I got into it too fast and I when you're doing muscle ups then you have to do like a very deep dip and some of sometimes the kind of elbows can get a bit bit sore from that. And what I was doing is I was just doing like this very slow biceps curls with the resistance band to help with the blood flow to the tendon in my elbow and to help with the, like, recovery and pretty much strengthening the elbow. So the difference between your muscles and elbows is that or like your tendons, is that the tendons and ligaments, it's much harder to like train them and they take a lot longer to recover. So one of the best ways to, like, strengthen your joints and tendons is to just do these slower repetitions and more controlled repetitions to direct as much blood flow to these regions because they don't have very good blood supply and that's also the reason why they're very, like, prone to injuries. So these are tendons in the elbows, knees, hips, etcetera. So just doing, like, this super slow and high repetition, like whatever movement it is, like either the biceps curl, push ups, or squats, or lunges, just do them, like, slowly controlled and with very high repetitions just, like, experience the muscle pump and know through, like, direct blood flow to those regions. That's what I'm doing, you know, pretty irregularly. It's just sometimes when you're not warming up properly, you might, you know, get a little of nagging pain from doing that. I actually did have, you know, several years ago, like, by now it was like almost eight years ago, I had a minor, like, tennis elbow in my, I guess it was left arm or I don't remember which arm it was. But, yeah, it was for the same reason I was doing muscle ups. At that point I wasn't, like, strong enough to do the muscle ups. I was again too fast to progress with the movement. So I hurt my tendon and it had, like, some tendon pain for several months. And during that time I wasn't able to do, like, pull ups that well. So I had to do the super slow push ups only, super slow resistance band curls. But after that, you know, my tendons and my elbow was much stronger than it was before and I was able to do, like, muscle ups very easily and heavy pull ups with, you know, a 100 kilos. So, you know, it goes to show that your body can become stronger from injuries. The key is obviously to not train in a way that get you injured, but, you know, the longer you train, the more years you have under your belt as a resistance training person, then you eventually will get some, I guess, minor injuries. I've never had any serious injuries fortunately, but, yeah, I've I've I've never also been just kind of reckless with my training apart from just, yeah, maybe a few too enthusiastic muscle ups that, you know, for a few weeks will make my elbow somewhat sore. And I I need to just, yeah, focus on kind of the slower repetitions and high repetitions during that time. You can also use like these blood flow restriction bands. I think those are amazing during this process because you can reduce their load and the intensity of the movement and get more directed response for the, like, the blood flow. So the resistance resistance bands with these blood flow restriction cuffs is one of the, like, most amazing way to recover from from these kind of injuries in my opinion. Next question, how much vitamin d is normal? I have a deficiency now I want to boost it. Vitamin d obviously is an essential hormone and, you know, the easiest way to increase your vitamin d levels is to get exposed to sunlight. Probably the fastest way to just take like large doses of vitamin d as a supplement, but the best way is through direct sunlight exposure. And so what what is considered to be vitamin d deficiency, so it depends who you ask, but the general consensus is that vitamin d below twenty nanograms per milliliter is associated with, is is considered to be like a vitamin d deficiency and, in nanomoles per liter that's fifty nanomoles per liter. What's the optimal vitamin d level for all cause mortality and longevity? Then, it appears to be something like thirty to forty nine nanograms per milliliter, which in the nanomoles is seventy five to ninety nine nanomoles per liter. So somewhere between there is, what you want to be with, your vitamin d levels. And if you're deficient or low in your vitamin d levels, then yeah, you know, get exposed to sunlight, consuming vitamin d rich foods like egg yolks, fish and those kind of things is gonna be also pretty effective. And but some other like hidden reasons could be that, obesity, extra body fat tends to lower vitamin d levels. But in most cases, most people they're just spending too much time indoors and not enough time outdoors. So, you can cover your daily like RDA for vitamin d. If you're somewhere around like Spain, so like this Near Equator kind of countries or this Mediterranean countries, you can color it during the summer with only like twenty to thirty minutes of, some exposure if you're wearing like, you know, shorts and a t shirt. If you're not wearing any clothes at all, then you can achieve it faster. But, if you're wearing more clothes then it takes more time to reach that. And, you know, if you're in The UK or somewhere higher up north, Canada, Norway, then during the summer you can also, yeah, achieve the RDA for vitamin d with something like thirty minutes of sun exposure. During the winter time in Norway and Canada and Finland and Russia, it's you're not gonna be able to probably reach the RDA for vitamin D by just being outside. So, you know, and you know interestingly I've never been vitamin D deficient probably because I'm eating plenty of vitamin D and I'm taking occasionally like a vitamin D supplement as well in the winter months. In the summer I'm not doing that because my vitamin d would go too high if I were to take vitamin d during the summer. So yeah, like too high vitamin d levels can also be problematic. So yeah kind of the sweet spot is in is in the middle. Next question, after making the basics, top three things with the biggest impact. I guess I would presume that top three biggest things for, like, longevity or the biggest things that have an impact on longevity. And, I guess I'll say the basics would be something like you're exercising, you know, if three to four times a week, your normal body weight, you don't have excess, like, body fat, and you're sleeping long enough. So you're sleeping something like seven to eight hours. Those will be the basics. So what are the the top three things above that? So I think doing some aspects of high intensity interval training would probably push your results, you know, further above the basics, further above just regular exercise. So the high intensity interval training is a very time efficient way to increase your VO2 max and, it's also one of the most potent ways to increase your VO2 max in the short term. And if you are doing like a one hit interval, this Norwegian protocol four by four, four minutes of sprinting or four minutes of like high intensity, four minutes of rest at low intensity, follow-up by four rounds. If you do that once a week, then you're gonna have a pretty positive effect on your rheot max and fat loss and other aspects of health as well. So I think exercise is still the most powerful way to improve your health currently and the fitter you are, the healthier you're gonna be generally as well. And if you just exercise more, like the studies are pretty clear that people who exercise more than is recommended have a lower risk of mortality and lower risk of this chronic disease as well and they're healthier. So exercising almost like up to the elite level appears to provide benefits. Maybe at the absolute elite level they you might experience some diminishing returns, but even then the studies find that the Olympian athletes live about five five years longer than the general population. So even the elite of the elite, the Olympian athletes, they still live longer than, the general population. So I guess for the average person it means that just exercising a lot more than you are currently will still give you more benefits. So almost all of us aren't exercising too much, if that makes sense. If you're exercising even five to six times a week for one hour every day, then it's still not, too much, so to say. If you started exercising two hours every day, then, maybe you'll start getting diminishing returns. But even then it appears that, yeah, the more you exercise, the healthier you'll generally be. And I think just adding some form of this, high intensity interval training is one of the quickest and most time efficient way to like reap some extra benefits to your health. The second biggest impact, I would say would be some aspects of sauna. So I'm a huge fan of sauna and I think that everyone would benefit from some sauna therapy in moderation. So, the kind of optimal protocol is you know 70 degrees Celsius, four times a week for twenty to thirty minutes. That's gonna give you the maximum benefits and, the interesting thing about the sauna is that, you know, they find that if you combined taking the sauna with exercise, you get better results from the exercise itself. So you get better results lowering blood pressure and increasing VO2 max and increasing HRV. So combining the sauna with exercise is better than just exercise alone. So yes exercise is amazing but if you do it with the sauna you're getting more benefits from the exercise. And of course, there's all these other studies linking sauna use with lower lower heart disease, lower, Alzheimer's and, lower mortality as well. So yeah, I think pretty much everyone would benefit from adding, you know, four times a four times a week of sauna. Even once or twice a week is gonna be enough or giving you enough for you to get some additional effects, but optimally, like the four times a week is the maximum benefits. And number three, I would say that it's actually rest. So taking time to rest, you know, you know, yes, putting a lot of hours to exercise and being very fit is one of the most powerful methods to to promote, like, health and to increase your fitness and health. But, if you're not recovering adequately enough, then, you're losing some of the benefits. So a lot of the potential gains also come when you're resting. So, yeah, it's kind of this work hard, play hard mentality. You need to also rest pretty hard. So that means making sure that you are definitely sleeping at least eight hours if you're exercising a lot and, you know, not not feeling bad about taking naps every once in a while and not feeling bad about just, you know, sitting on the couch and, doing whatever it is just to kind of, relax because, you know, you are exerting your body quite a lot which is healthy and appears to be linked to lower risk of mortality, then you also need to kind of put in the hours of rest and relaxation. So these would be my top biggest things. So like being super fit and doing some form of high intensity exercise. Number two, taking a sauna regularly and number three, also resting a lot. Next question, how do you go from 21% body fat to 12% body fat? So the way you go from 21 to 12% or from 30 to 20% is, you know, the same kind of process. I have made a video about how would I go from being overweight to fit but, you know, you can follow some step. You know, you don't have to go immediately super aggressive with this, weight loss journey. You can follow steps, but, you know, it depends where you're starting from. If you are eating junk food, then the easiest way to lose weight is to just eliminate the hyperpalatable ultra processed foods and, by doing that and replacing them with leaner proteins and, fibrous vegetables, then you'll probably automatically start losing weight quite rapidly and you'll probably lose a few percentages of your body fat just by doing that. The second easiest thing is to just remove extra added fats. So extra butter, extra large, you know, even like extra olive oil in, two large quantities, they're gonna make you gain weight. So, just extra fats at a certain you don't need, like, a ton of fat to be healthy. You don't need a ton of fat for whatever the goal is. For, like, testosterone production, they find that 40% of your calories as fat is the maximum benefits, so you don't need any more more than that. So removing extra fats will also make you lose a few percentages, of your body fat just by reducing your calorie intake. Third thing third thing is to just start increasing not only exercise, you know, yeah, if you're exercising only once a week then you add at least you wanna do at least three times a week of exercise, go to the gym for that, you know, that will probably also make you gain, like lose weight at the same time. But just increasing the need, so this non exercise activity thermogenesis is one of the most underrated ways to lose weight. So that means walking more and trying to be more, like, animated with the movements, trying to maybe do the soleus push ups that I made a video about recently where you're doing, like, seated calf raises while you're, you know, sitting or in the office job. Just any form of movement, it adds up quite a lot. You don't burn a lot of calories doing the exercise itself because you're exercising only like an hour. But if you do a lot of NEET all throughout the day, then you burn a lot more calories by doing that. So just take the stairs. I, you know, have a walking treadmill. I use that to quite often every day when you're stuck somewhere sitting. You can't like, you know, you're you have to do something while sitting then you can do the service push ups and yeah, a lot of ways to increase your need. That's the most underrated way to actually lose weight. Just move more but move in a way that doesn't like make you tired and, it kind of adds up over the course of the entire day. Next question, how much fruit do you eat per day? So usually I'll eat maybe two to three pieces of fruit per day and it's gonna be like one apple, one kiwi and some berries. So maybe like blueberries or raspberries something like that. So yeah, three servings of fruits per day And, yeah, it works great. And I I don't I could eat more as well. I'd I just, you know, I don't have that much, I guess, taste of fruit. I I like the taste, obviously, but it's just so satiating, like, how much apples are you gonna eat. If you eat five apples or five bananas, five kiwis, whatever is eventually just becomes too much and you get too full by doing that. And the last question is how harmful are fitness watches like Garmin? My goal is to monitor stats during workouts. So with these smartwatches or these other fitness trackers, I guess the fear is that they emanate EMF and they're somehow harmful to your health by causing this, I guess inflammation or oxidative stress to your cells. Now it it is true that it might be too early in the use of these smartwatches and devices to see if it does have any negative effects on your health. It's like the artificial sweeteners. You know, artificial sweeteners have been around for decades and, if they were to be harmful, then we would know already by now. But based on the evidence right now, there's, like, like no harm to artificial sweeteners. Any at least at least not in like the majority of people. Some people might yet get more cravings by consuming artificial sweeteners, but in the general population there appears to be no harm from artificial sweeteners unless you're yeah drinking I guess, like, you know, five liters of diet coke per day. And the same with, like, the smartwatches. Smart smartwatches are obviously much, like, younger. They've been around for only, like, a few years, maybe ten years at most. So yeah, it's too early to see, okay, what happens to people who use these smartwatches all the time. But this can still be like confounded by these healthy Uzubhas. So people who use smartwatches or like a heart rate monitor, whatever it is, they're also exercising. So, you know, why why do they use the smartwatch? They use it to track their heart rate while exercising. So it's probably it's gonna be probably the case that even if these smartwatches were to have any like increase in inflammation, then the benefits you get from exercise counteract that, like, multifold. So the benefits you get from exercise are, like, you know, five times better than the small information you might get from this EMF from this smartwatch. But even then I think the amount of this EMF or whatever other exposure you're getting from them is so small that it probably has no no effect and, I wouldn't be like worried about using especially if you're using them only during the workouts, you know, if you're if you were to use like, Bluetooth headphones and smartwatches twenty four seven, then maybe over the course of years you might have some, like, increased risk in some conditions. But as of now there's no evidence that it would do so even if you were to use them twenty four seven. But I guess the best advice is to just not use it twenty four seven. If you use it only during the workout, then the benefits you get from the workout are several times greater than any of the potential risk that you or the potential harm that you could get, from these smartwatches. And even then, you know, the evidence of any harm is very limited at the moment. Alright. That's it for this video. As a reminder, you can now preorder my new book, The Longevity Leap, at thelongevityleap.com. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is Siim. The optimized. Stay empowered.