Alright. First question, best foods and supplements for brain health. The first one would be omega threes both from the dietary source as well as the supplemental form. So from a dietary source, fish, seafood is associated with lower rates of, you know, heart disease, but also Alzheimer's. So, the same, you know, with supplements, there is less of association between supplement use of omega threes and, lower rates of Alzheimer's or dementia. But it certainly is, for, cardiovascular diseases. With, Alzheimer's specifically, there's the association between a higher omega three index and lower rates of Alzheimer's and, dementia and all cause mortality. So I think that's a very great way to assess whether or not omega threes are working for you. We have an actual blood marker that you can measure and see, okay, is there enough omega three fatty acids, EPA and DHA in my in my red blood cells? So, that's why I like omega threes and the omega three index as a blood test, to do if it's if it's working. The second supplement would be a creatine. So creatine used to be thought of as a sports supplement exclusively, but there's a lot of new studies showing that creatine is also great for memory, especially in elderly people, and, it might have some neuroprotective effects as well. There's no studies, you know, clinical trials with creatine on Parkinson's or Alzheimer's, etcetera. But creatine is undoubtedly beneficial for the brain. Your brain uses a lot of creatine and, you know, creatine is kind of very beneficial for energy production, overall. And one interesting and underrated way creatine has benefits on the brain is by reducing your sleep demand. So, because of the way creatine is utilized by the brain for energy then, having higher creatine stores in the brain would reduce also your sleep demand and, lowers the sleep pressure. So you're feeling less tired even if you sleep slightly shorter periods of time. So whenever I'm, let's say, traveling or if I'm missing a few nights of sleep or a few hours of sleep, then I usually, kind of megadose creatine on those days. And, even before getting the sleep deprivation, it's good to, like, build up to, like, higher creatine levels in the brain by taking slightly higher doses every day. So like five to ten grams every day. And, yeah, the much higher doses appear to be even better than the lower doses. So up to, a hundred milligrams per kilogram. So for me, that will be eight grams per day. Someone heavier, it will be even more. So usually, in a lot of the studies, they use much higher doses than people typically recommend which would be like three grams per day. I think three grams is great but it's not the optimal based on the clinical trials where they find even up to eight to ten grams is beneficial. And even some cases with the sleep deprivation studies, they find even like twenty grams. Taking twenty grams of creatinine for several days before sleep deprivation has very great effects in reducing the performance drop off from, sleep deprivation. So you can take creatine as a supplement. You can get it also from foods. Although it's pretty hard to get, you know, eight to ten grams of creatine from just foods, to get five grams of creatine, you would need to eat approximately 500 grams of herring or like a kilogram of red meat. So, you know, some people definitely are able to pull it off. It's just, you know, you also end up consuming quite a lot of calories in the process unless you're eating herring. So 400 grams, 500 grams of herring, you get five grams of creatine. And to get the 10, you would need to double that. And the same applies to meat. To get the ten grams of creatine from just meat, you would need to eat two kilograms of, meat. So yeah. You know, to each his own. I would, you know, much rather take some of the, let's say, goal I would get some of that goal with a supplemental creatine because it's very cheap, very studied. It's the most studied supplement in history probably. It has the most amount of studies out there. So yeah, that's how you pretty much get creatine. The next food would be egg yolks. So egg yolks are also you know, packed with a lot of different micronutrients that your brain needs. But specifically, it's very high in these carotenoids like lutein and zeaxanthin and also choline that's essential for the myelination of the neurons. So egg yolks are very beneficial for the brain in terms of the micronutrients and, I wouldn't supplement choline itself. Like, there are some potential, let's say, downside to supplemental choline in my opinion, specifically related to kidney function through increasing TMAO. So I would much rather get the choline from the dietary sources such as egg yolks yolks or liver are also pretty high. It's also like very high in a choline. So, yeah, that's how you would get the choline in my opinion. Like four twenty milligrams per day is the kind of recommended amount which you can get from three to four egg yolks, typically. But you can also supplement some of these carotenoids like lutein and zeaxanthin. So you can get lutein and zeaxanthin also from these orange vegetables and orange fruits like pumpkin, squash, cantaloupe, this, persimmon, different kinds of orange types of vegetables, carrots, sweet potatoes, etcetera. And the last carotenoid that you can also supplement, plus you can get it from food, is astaxanthin. So, good for the eyes. The same with the carotenoids, the lutein and zeaxanthin, very good for the eyes. It's been seen that a higher carotenoid intake from dietary resources is associated with lower rates of macular degeneration and neurodegeneration as well. So yeah, I'm a big believer in carotenoids so I'm getting quite a lot of dietary carotenoids in myself. Plus I take astaxanthin for the other benefits, For the skin benefits, for, like senescent benefits as well. So it Azaxanthin has also benefits on removing senescent cells. So twelve grams of, Azaxanthin is what I'm taking every day. But you can get it also from fish. Specifically like pink kind of foods. Pink fish like salmon. The last supplement I would say is a bonus. There's not like a ton of research done on yet but magnesium l threonate is the specific type of magnesium that's the most bioavailable to the brain. So I haven't seen, like, a ton of, like, let's say convincing evidence, on magnesium l threonate yet but, it's in the pipeline. I would imagine that eventually we'll, over the next few years, we will probably have quite interesting studies about magnesium L threonate and brain health as well. Next question. What's the best and worst longevity advice you got in your life? I think the best advice I wouldn't say I got it from someone but just through my own research of the field and reading a ton of books, reading a ton of studies, thinking about the entire, like, idea itself. I would say the best advice out there would be to track your blood work. At least on a semi regular basis. You don't need to track your blood work every month. Even like twice a year is probably more than enough for most people. I'd say like once a year having like measuring at least some of the more, conventional blood markers such as your lipids, your inflammation markers, white blood cells, electrolytes, liver markers, kidney markers, and, glucose markers, etcetera, sex hormones. Just just a very, rudimentary blood analysis would give you a lot of insight into your health. Because, you know, we live our lives, we feel either good or bad depending on our health status, depending on our micronutrient status, depending on our sleep, depending on the season, depending on how much light we're getting, etc. But, the only way to actually know if you're healthy or not is to look inside. What's inside your body? And, you know, blood work is. I wouldn't say it's like It's not like perfect. Obviously, there's a lot of, nuances to blood work. There's a lot of, you know, if More like complexities to it as well. Kind of, depends a lot on the context, depends a lot on the individual. But generally we have a pretty good understanding of what's optimal for different blood markers and what's out of the range, what is, heading towards a particular chronic disease. So one great example is that, you know, you're not gonna get diabetes overnight. Diabetes is a disease that you develop over the course of many years and decades. So, your blood sugar isn't gonna just, you know, one day you're gonna wake up and it's immediately in the diabetic range. Like, it's normal, normal below one hundred milligrams, below one hundred milligrams and then boom, one hundred and thirty milligrams you're diabetic. It doesn't really work like that. It's more generally that on your first, you're prediabetic, you stay there for a little while and then eventually you'll develop full blown diabetes or get diagnosed with it. So whenever you're seeing that you're heading in the wrong direction with your blood markers, you're seeing that your testosterone is chronically low, or your your kidney markers are declining slowly slowly, then, you can reverse the course. You can change something about your lifestyle or supplements or diet or exercise, whatever it is. Maybe you need to lose weight and then it fixes the blood, blood sugar problem immediately, whatever the issue is. You can see it getting worse and then you can make preemptive action to change it. That's the power of tracking things regularly. And if you just rely on your intuition, and rely on, you know, like, what other people might tell you, then, you might be heading in the wrong or at least you're gonna wanna take the risk. That I guess that's the point. You know, it's always better to be on the safe side, rather than following experimental diets, experimental procedures, it's better to be on the safe side because you only have one life. You know, you only have one kidney. Technically speaking, because if you give away one of your kidneys or if you lose one of your kidneys then you only have one left. So you technically still have only one kidney. And you know, the same applies to every other thing in your body. You don't wanna take any chances, I guess. As long as your goal is to live as long as possible and be as healthy as possible. So you don't really wanna take chances. And tracking your blood work is just the most effective way to assess your internal health. Of course you need to look at it in the whole picture. If your mental health sucks because of or despite having perfect blood markers, your mental health is bad. Or if your physical fitness is bad, you have perfect blood markers but you're with very low muscle strength or you have very low bone density, then of course those things matter as well. The bone density and the muscle strength or the mental health etc. So it's not just like in isolation but it's still one of the best ways to assess your internal health. The worst health advice or worst longevity advice I got out there or what is circling around. You know, I guess you could say something like fermented urine therapy or something. I've seen, you know, on you can find a lot of like TikToks or something about a lot of crazy health hacks or health advice out there. You know, fermented urine that has been fermenting, for twelve months or something like that. Or juice fasting itself is considered to be healthy by a lot of people, but I wouldn't say that juice fasting is healthy at all. First of all, because you're consuming so many carbohydrates and sugars, you're kicking yourself out of ketosis and you're not eating enough protein. So what happens is if you do juice fasting for weeks and months you're gonna be catabolizing a lot of the muscle tissue because you're not in ketosis and you're not getting any protein. So, it's a very fast way to lose a lot of muscle by doing juice fasting. So I definitely wouldn't recommend that. And, I mean, fermented urine therapy is also, you know, again, what's the potential health benefits that you might gain and what are the potential risks, you know. Even if there aren't no risks, then why would you do it? If there's not, anything specific to a gain from that, either. Maybe, you know, eventually we'll get some research about it, but, I'm pretty sure that, there's not gonna be much there. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices, which are the bond charge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices, but do they actually work? Yes. They do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin antiaging, hormone optimization, pain management, and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes, especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the Bond Charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most regular Therabodyzers don't have the right wavelengths of light, which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Boncharge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research, and they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code SIIM, s I I m, for a 15% discount. Next question, top three spices you add to your meals. So I think herbs and spices are super underrated. They're, you know, per calorie basis, they're the most nutrient dense foods on the planet. Like, they have a ton of micronutrients, a ton of polyphenols. The problem is that to get an efficacious amount you would have to consume, like, you know, tablespoons and tablespoons of different types of spices. So yeah. You know, at the end of the day you'll be just seasoning your food with different herbs and spices and you're getting a fraction of the amounts of those micronutrients and the amounts of the polyphenols. But I think still think that it's worthwhile to do to add different herbs and spices to your foods. In addition to the polyphenolic compounds and the micronutrients you're also getting, they also protect against, the glycation of the food. So if you're frying your steaks or if you're cooking food at high temperature, you're going to, produce these advanced glycation end products that, things like rosemary inhibit. So, thyme, rosemary, lemongrass, parsley, a ton of different just regular garden herbs, they can, reduce the advanced glycation end products and they also inhibit CD38 which is, this glycoprotein that, lowers your NAD levels. So with aging there's a, like a parallel increase in CD38 levels and a decline in NAD levels and a decline in mitochondrial function. So it's almost like a parallel phenomenon. And CD38 is the major reason why NAD levels decline with age. So, inhibiting it with things like apigenin that you get from parsley, thyme and rosemary etcetera is I think it's a very easy thing. So my top three would be, you know, rosemary as a herb. I think that is the best one. For spices specifically, you know, I like turmeric is a great spice. Has anti inflammatory benefits. Inhibits senescent cells. Protects against lipid peroxidation. Also good for glycation etc. So tastes good as well. So I like turmeric as a spice. And the last one I would probably add cayenne pepper. Like, I like spicy food. I I pretty pretty much enjoy it. I eat kimchi almost everyday as one of my go to fermented foods. So, kimchi is usually like quite spicy with cayenne pepper. So cayenne pepper, the capsaicin can be a good way to burn or increase metabolic rate as well. Obviously, it's not gonna move the needle a ton, but, yeah, generally it's quite tasty and great. Next question. How do you manage mini bulking cycles eating up to 3,500 calories while doing intermittent fasting. So yeah, I've been doing intermittent fasting for the last twelve years and I've been doing, you know, two meals pretty much the entire period of that time. So in the past, the first four years, I was doing sixteen and eight. I had a small, brunch, essentially, and then post workout meal after that, which was larger amounts of calories. And I've always had the post workout meal has always been at least 2,000 calories. You know, I usually don't go super high with calories if I am trying to build muscle or gain a mess, gain weight. I probably stick around 2,500 to 3,000 calories on most days. How do I do it? You know, nowadays I have even a even more skewed window. I have, you know, something like 300, 400 calories in my protein shake in the morning and in a post workout meal I'll eat over 2,000 calories. I guess like the only way to answer that is that I'm just a machine when it comes to eating. Like I can eat I can eat like, you know, probably five kilograms of steak in one sitting. I can eat like a massive pizza in one sitting. I could eat like five liters of ice cream in one sitting. You know, I don't know. I'm just like I'm not even like, you know, it's not like I'm ravenous or hungry. It's just my stomach is very good at digestion. Like I have zero digestion problems. I can eat all the gluten in the world. I can eat all the lectins in the world. I can eat all the oxalates. I can eat all the dairy. I can eat everything pretty much in large amounts. And my digestion is unhindered. Like zero effect on my digestion. I have zero bloating, zero constipation, zero gas. I guess I'm just like a machine when it comes to digestion. I have very good digestion and I've had it pretty much all my life. I have zero allergies, zero food intolerances, I don't get any itchy, scratchy, anything like that. Yeah. For me it's very easy to eat like massive amounts of food in one sitting. I feel like it's very you know, I guess intuitive or natural. Like, you know, in the past humans would also, like, go through periods of not eating and then they would eat a lot. And I guess I've just conditioned my body to be able to do it over the last twelve years. You know, maybe you know, I would I don't say it's the best way to go about it. I don't think it's necessary. You know, if you like to eat smaller meals, that's fine. If you can't eat massive amounts of meals, then that's fine. I don't think it's superior to eating massive amounts of meals and for, like, bulking purposes for maximum muscle growth, maximum gym performance, then it's probably better to have four meals per day as shown by research that four meals for naturals is the maximum that you can get benefits from. There's no need to eat six meals but, you know, there's no inherent additional benefits to eating two meals or one meal either. It's just the way I do it. And, the way I able to pull it off is just, I guess, very high stomach acid and tons of, digestive power, for some reason. Maybe genetics. Next question. What are your top 10 best purchases? I presume it's better to keep it in the topic of, like, health purchases, health related items. My best purchase, like, the one that I'm most excited about, most, like, grateful for is probably like a infrared sauna. So, I think if you you know, I have a regular sauna at my home, like in an actual building, that you build, but I also have infrared sauna which is more convenient. You can heat it up faster. You can, you know, turn it on and off pretty easily. And it also has the additional benefits of the infrared wavelengths of light that you don't get from the traditional sauna. So if I could ever choose between a traditional sauna, infrared sauna, the infrared sauna is just better because you get not only the heat temperature but you also get the infrared wavelengths that you don't get from a regular sauna. So that's why infrared sauna is probably like my best number one favorite product, purchase, out there. Number two, the best second best thing out there is like infrared sauna blanket. That's also amazing. I love it, a lot Because you can just plug it in. It warms up to 70 degrees Celsius in like two minutes. Then you sit there. You can browse your phone or laptop, whatever it is. Twenty minutes. You clean it and you can just put it under your bed. It takes very little space and, super convenient to use. So that's why those two are the best purchases. Number three would be a red light panel, whichever size it is, like, just the red light feels great. Like, modern world, these blue lights were exposed to a lot of artificial light, especially here in Estonia. There's winter right now, there's almost like no sunlight at all. So whenever the sun is out I'm gonna go out but that's only like every two days for two hours or something like that. So that's why I like to have a red light panel. I'll use it every day in the winter months for fifteen to twenty minutes, usually in the morning. Number four would be blue light blockers. So the artificial light, again, is very prominent in modern society, especially in the evening. You know, I'm not the kind of person to just turn everything off and sit in front of candlelight or something like that for one hour before bed. I'd much rather, you know, still like live a regular life, but I would just hack it with the use of blue blocking glasses. So the blue blocking glasses that have a see through lens, they're obviously not gonna work. You need the blue blocking glasses that have the orange lens to actually filter out the blue light and the green light. So that's what I like to use and they work. You know, there's a lot of skepticism about those things. There are studies out there that show that blue light blocking glasses do improve sleep and they obviously filter out the blue light that inhibits melatonin production. And on top of that, from my own personal experience, I have seen that my deep sleep score increases when I am using, blue light blocking glasses. And it's just less stimulating, like this kind of blue light. If you're exposed to this kind of bright light, you know, even two to three hours before bed, you're gonna be much more awake immediately before bed if you didn't get exposed to this bright light or if you filter it out or if it's even slightly dimmer. So yes, the first step is to dim down the lights. Don't use something super bright like this one here. Pink Himalayan salt lamp if you have the Philips or something that you can regulate the intensity of the light. Those are the first steps to do. But if you wanna use a computer screen or something, a phone, then, the glasses are the best option for that. Next up, something more related to fitness. So, a pull up bar. Specifically what I like is the bouldering bar. You might have seen from some of my videos or reels on Instagram. It's kind of this thicker pull up bar, or it's called the bouldering bar. It's used in like bouldering gyms where you're doing the mountaineering training. That's very good for grip strength develop development and, it's much thicker than a regular pull up bar. I like to do it I like to do pull ups on the bouldering bar. And if I could ever choose, I would always choose the bouldering, bar or the bouldering board, as it's called. It's kind of, more, I guess, has more more, ways you can use it compared to just the regular pull up bar. But the regular pull up bar is obviously better than nothing. You can just hang from there, do a few pull ups, you can do ab work on there and yeah, it's really good. Next would be a stainless steel pan. So using teflon coated, cookware is a no go because teflon it excretes microplastics into your food. Eventually you're gonna scratch it off and then it, like, literally, like, leaches billions of these microplastics into your food. Even just a single scratch. And eventually you will scratch it through accident or just, exposure. So, Teflon is definitely something that you want to, avoid and a lot of this other non stick coating tends to also be equally as bad, maybe slightly better than a Teflon but, they still have some, let's say, compounds that are not good for the endocrine system, etcetera. So a regular stainless steel pan is the best pan out there in my opinion because the iron skillet, you're gonna have a ton of iron leaching from there as well. So most people are getting too much iron in their diet Unless you have low iron. But, men especially, they're getting a ton of iron if they use even just the regular cooking they're getting it from their food. So if you use an iron skillet on top of that then you're getting a ton more iron, into your food which is not good for heart health and liver health. So, yeah, liver liver can accumulate a ton of iron if you're eating or exposed to it a lot. So the stainless steel, it doesn't leach anything. It's just steel. It's very, it doesn't stick either, you know, you just need to use some sort of oil or some other, fat to, make it more moisturised but, the stainless steel is equally as non stick as your best non stick pan out there. So I'm a huge fan of a stainless steel, pan or some sort of a ceramic pan. Just make sure it doesn't have any coating. Next, a cooling mattress. So if you're living in somewhere that has hot summers or just hot temperature and you wanna sleep in a cooler environment then some sort of a cooling mattress is very beneficial, very useful because you can just it makes your nights so much more refreshing and so much more enjoyable. Like, I hate hot temperatures when it comes to sleeping. Like, if I don't have a cooling mattress, it's like 35 degrees Celsius out then it's gonna be pretty bad or hard for me to fall asleep. I'm very sensitive to hot temperature. I sleep very good in cold temperatures as well. So I like to use a cooling mattress. I've used the ChiliPad in the past. It didn't work that well. You know, it it got the job done to a certain extent but it wasn't it sometimes didn't work and it's it didn't cool as as cool as I'd liked it to be. Whereas now I have the Eight Sleep. So the Eight Sleep is very, very good. Like, it, also tracks your sleep. You can see your HRV, your heart rate, your sleep stages, etcetera. But, the cooling mechanism is, very good. Like you turn it on, you put it minus 10 and it you can immediately feel the b and you can also just change the other side of the bed to whatever you like. So if your partner likes it hot like warmer or even cooler, whatever the situation is, then, they can choose it from their side. You have the app, you can choose the temperature on both sides of the bed And it tracks on both sides of the bed as well. So you can see the partner can see your score and, you can see your score as well. So that's definitely the best cooling mat out there right now. Next purchase, I think it's number eight, is a walking treadmill disc. So a lot of people complain that they can't get their steps in. They don't have enough time to walk because of work or something like that. The easiest answer is to get a walking treadmill desk. It makes it very easy, you know, one hour of working in front of your computer while walking, you're gonna get something like 3,500 or 4,000 steps from just one hour of walking. And if you do it throughout the day, you'll easily get 12,000 steps or however many steps that you want. So, the treadmill desk is, definitely very useful and I definitely recommend it. Now, if you don't have a treadmill desk one way to hack it is to do the soleus push up. So, if you're only standing so you only have a standing desk, you only stand and you don't walk or you don't change positions or you don't move then that's not the best alternative. Because the stagnation, even when you're standing, your metabolically is still inactive and, you know, it can still wear down your joints because you're standing and applying pressure to the joints by standing. Whereas if you're sitting but you're doing the soleus push up, which you can check out from the podcast with Doctor. Mark Hamilton, then, you're keeping your metabolism active. You're improving your glucose tolerance and, yeah. It's just I think it's actually better than just standing. The best thing is to probably, like, walk and do soleus push ups intermittently. But the second best thing is to just sit and do do the soleus push up. And number nine is kettlebells. So you can see I have some kettlebells here. Two kettlebells here. Those are 28 kilogram kettlebells. I also have like 40 kilogram kettlebells for some heavier swings. I have lighter ones as well, like 12 kilograms. So getting a few kettlebells, you know, some lighter ones, some medium heavy ones, is just a great way to, like, okay, I can't go to the gym, I'm gonna do a few kettlebell swings. Or, you know, I wanna do some farmer's carries for some grip strength. Or whatever it is. You can use the kettlebells for, you can do squats with them, you can do farmer's carries, you can do do just kettlebell swings, you can do push and jerk, you can do snatches, you can strap them on your lifting belt and do pull ups with them, weighted pull ups. So kettlebells are just amazing. I think they're very functional, they're underutilized, and y'know, everything is much harder with a kettlebell. You know, at the gym you have the dumbbells, they're perfect, they're balanced, you can push them, y'know, you have more control over the dumbbells but with the kettlebells, y'know, if you lift it over, you try to do a shoulder press with a kettlebell it's much harder than with a dumbbell because the weight is not evenly distributed and it's actually on a on a, like, angle that is actually harder. Like, it's a range of motion that you're not trained that often. So it's a very functional, training tool that you do have. Because you're training unconventionally that, you know, makes you just more well rounded as like a fitness enthusiast or athlete. And the last thing on the list is red light light bulbs. So I have one here that I use pretty much every night that, you know blue light from the screen and red light from the light bulb. This is from Boncharge. You can also get from like regular incandescent light bulbs from from Amazon but the idea is you just, yeah, not have bright LED lights mess up your circadian rhythm and mess up your melatonin. So yeah, these are the top 10 best purchases in my opinion that, I value the most. You obviously might have something different but I think these are pretty good ones that everyone should, you know, incorporate in some shape or form. Next question. If taking melatonin almost daily, what would be the dose? Is three milligrams daily high in the long run? So three milligrams isn't a massive dose. It's, you know, higher than most people would recommend. Let's say, usually you would hear that one milligram or less is an optimal dose for daily use. But there was a recent meta analysis that found that for sleep quality, specifically four milligrams of melatonin and even like two hours before bed was, better for sleep quality than, two milligrams of melatonin one thirty minutes before bed. So, based on that study, like a meta analysis of multiple studies, taking larger amounts is better and taking it even much sooner than what you would, typically hear, appears to be better. Because, yeah, like, you wanna already have higher amounts of melatonin circulating in your system before you actually go to bed. Because if you take melatonin, okay, five minutes before bed, it's gonna take, you know, at least thirty to sixty minutes before it kicks in. So, the idea is that taking it two hours before bed, you're already kind of drowsy and sleepy because melatonin tends to do that. So you take it two hours before bed, you know, thirty minutes before bed, you're already kind of, you know, can't wait to go to bed and fall asleep. So that's kind of the rationale behind that. And four milligrams, you know, I personally don't like four milligrams or three milligrams. I like, like, zero point three milligrams works the best for me. Maybe because my body is producing enough melatonin as a default, but if I were to be over 50 years old I would definitely take like three milligrams of melatonin every night. Because the older you get the lower your melatonin production, typically is. If you're like 80 years old, you're producing, like, 10 times less melatonin as you did in your, teenage years or early, twenties. So, yeah. Right now, I don't feel the need to take any more than zero point three. On some nights, I might take one or three milligrams, but on a daily basis personally I would say zero point three would be the best for me. I think you need to just try it out and see what is the best for you. Based on the meta analysis, four milligrams two hours before bed is better than other alternatives or at least two milligrams before, thirty minutes before bed. Maybe some other amounts in some other, time dimensions, time durations would be better. But But they didn't compare it that way. They compared it four milligrams two hours before bed to two milligrams thirty minutes before bed. So, yeah. You can just try and see what works best. Next question. What's your favorite food? I think my all time favorite food is probably like a good omelette. So like, like a few eggs, maybe some, milk or some something like a dairy base with a bunch of herbs, tomatoes, and, that's it. Like, a regular and some cheese as well probably. I think that's my, like, all time favorite food. Or like a food that I would be fine to eat every meal for the rest of my life. Like if I could just eat omelette for the rest of my life, that would be I would be fine with that. I think it tastes great and it has a good nutrient profile. So, yeah. That would be my favorite food. You know, I like to eat like a bunch of different foods. I like a ton of different foods. You know, I can eat like a good curry. I can eat a good soup. I can eat a good steak. I can eat, potatoes. I can eat fruits. I can eat, yogurt. I can eat, whatever food. There is like, you know, there are obviously some foods that I don't like, but, I generally I'm not like super attached to, like, any specific food. Like if I If I wanna change something about my blood work, I change my diet. If I want to build muscle, lose fat, whatever it is, I change my diet accordingly. So I'm not like really super attached to a specific food. Or I don't have like any Okay, I need to eat this food. Or else I'm not gonna make it. Or else I'm not gonna be able to stick to my diet or something like that. Next question. Advice on how to approach blood work? So yeah, like I said earlier tracking your blood work is one of the best things for preventive purposes, for, like, information or educational purposes about your health. Like, I call this increasing your longevity intelligence, increasing your understanding about your own health and understanding of your health risk factors. So what are your risk factors for heart disease, diabetes, kidney disease, etcetera. If you never track these things, then you don't know, what's your actual risk. So what is the how do we approach that thing? Because, you know, there's hundreds of blood markers that you could measure, the doctor at your doctors. They will probably measure something like a dozen of them, etcetera. I think you don't need to measure hundreds of blood markers, you need to measure, yeah, just a handful of the most important ones, the ones that are most relevant to the major chronic diseases. Such as, you know, heart disease, diabetes, neurodegeneration, and and, kidney disease in the in the developed world. You know, first of all, get an understanding of what are the ranges, like, what is a typically, like, a good reference range or, like, a normal reference range for a lot of these blood markers. Because that would understand, okay, what are we even talking about? What kind of a range are we talking about? The thing with the reference ranges is obviously is that they're not necessarily optimal. You know, there's always the normal reference range and the optimal reference range for the lowest mortality risk and the lowest risk of this chronic diseases is usually much narrower. So a great example of it is triglycerides. The reference range for triglycerides is anything below 150 is considered normal. At the blood work panel you would see, like, this is the normal reference range. But based on the studies, anything above fifty milligrams per deciliter already is associated with a higher risk of, heart disease. So it's not, you know I wouldn't say it's optimal to have a triglyceride of like 110. It's technically in the normal range, your doctor isn't gonna freak out about it, but it's, it's far it's like almost double the amount of what would be optimal for the lowest risk of a heart disease. So there is always optimal and normal. Now the optimal ranges are a bit trickier to find because all the laboratories usually just use the normal reference ranges. Different labs use different reference ranges but they still are generally in the same ballpark of, where 95 of the population would fall into. So, with optimal reference ranges, you know, the first option is to do a lot of research yourself. Go to PubMed, look at studies. Okay, vitamin D levels or colon mortality. You're gonna find tons of different studies and usually they tend to be very similar so like meta analyses are the best way to go about it because meta analyses are looking at multiple studies altogether and then they come to a conclusion. Okay, based on these 12 studies on this topic, this is the optimal range. So you can go through a lot of different blood markers, that way. But unfortunately a lot of the blood markers a lot of the blood markers don't have that many studies either. So like more less conventional blood markers, like some red blood cells, hematocrit or platelets or, basophils or neutrophils or something like that. They don't have that many studies even to begin with to find the optimal range. So then you're kind of trying to find a balance between the normal range and then maybe a few studies there are out there that indicate towards an optimal range. In my book, The Longevity Leap, I've, done the heavy lifting with that pretty, well in my opinion. I cover like 70 biomarkers. Starting with lipids, ending with all the immune cells. Liver markers, iron markers, inflammation markers, etcetera. So I go through the major studies on that and then I provide, okay, these are the normal reference ranges and these are the optimal reference ranges. So if you just want to know what is the optimal range for all these different blood markers, then, you know, my recommendation is to get my book because, you know, you get the reference ranges but you'll also get what to do about it. What do you do actually to improve a lot of these bot markers? And, you know, of course, I wouldn't say that I'm the end all, be all or that is the best book out there, but I do think, in my humble opinion, in an I I'm unbiased opinion, I would say that it is very specific and very detailed. I've, I've done a lot of research and I've, yeah, looked at the major 70 blood markers and, given them the optimal, reference ranges as well. So I would recommend to get the book pretty much, because, yeah, it's gonna save you a lot of time and, you'll also learn a lot of other information from there. So how frequently should you do blood work? You know, like I said, if you do it once a year then that's already good enough. If you have everything normal and also like pretty close to optimal then you don't need to do the same blood markers routinely every year or twice a year or something like that. Unless you are changing something or unless there is something that needs slight improvements and you just want to know if it's getting better or not. For example, you know, my homocysteine was slightly elevated. It was in the normal range, but I wanted to get it closer to the optimal range. I did a bunch of stuff. I, I took some supplements. I took, hyperbaric oxygen therapy, and it went to the optimal or very close to the optimal range. So this is just one example. Okay. I had one blood marker. I did, like, something like three to four tests within the last six months for this blood marker Just to see if it's getting better or not And it, you know, that's the kind of scientific approach to it You measure, you do something, you introduce an intervention One at a time, ideally and then you measure again, see if it's improving or not. You introduce another intervention. So the first thing I did was, you know, I had homocysteine, it was nine. Or it was actually 12 before I took some methyl donors, specifically TMG, four grams a day. It dropped down to nine. I increased my TMG dose even higher. It didn't go lower, so it kinda capped out. I had four grams of TMG. Then I introduced I was also taking a B complex, so that was already excluded that that's not gonna make any difference either. And then I introduced hyperbaric oxygen therapy and then dropped to six. So, I didn't do all at once because, you know, chances are I don't need to do all at once. If you're if you're like fifty kilograms overweight then you don't need to, you know, take a bunch of fat burners, take Ozempic, take all these things like that all at once. Maybe you just need to, like, replace regular soda with diet soda or sparkling water or whatever it is and then you immediately lose 20 kilos. Just from this one change. And that can apply to your blood markers as well. You have prediabetic blood sugar levels. You're gonna make a simple change. You're gonna replace regular soda or some juice with a non caloric beverage and immediately you lose a lot of, weight and also your blood sugar goes to normal. So you don't need to start taking metformin, first. First do some of the easy wins and then see if you need to add something to, make additional improvements if necessary. So that's the way you would test and retest different blood markers. Same with like cholesterol or CRP for example. Your CRP is something that can fluctuate a lot. If you had a recent infection then your immune system your immune cells can be all over the place so you shouldn't make like any definite conclusions about that you knew you had an infection just before you did the blood test or even like, even like three weeks before you did the blood test you had some sort of infection or flu. It can affect your CRP levels even like a few weeks after the fact. So you shouldn't like jump into immediate conclusions that something is wrong with you. You retest again, you know, you wait another two weeks, you do another just a one single marker CRP because you don't wanna break the bank by retesting all the 100 markers. You retest the CRP again. Okay, okay, my, CRP is normal now if it's just infection. If the CRP is still elevated but you're also overweight or you have other metabolic issues then, you know, fix the metabolic issues and lose the weight. And then your CRP will generally improve. Visceral fat, you know, if you don't look overweight but your CRP is high maybe you have high amounts of visceral fat. You can't see visceral fat that much. You could even have like visible abs but still have somewhat unnormal amounts of visceral fat. So yeah, test, retest. Introduce one at a time ideally. And retest it and see where it's going. Alright. That's it for this Q and A. If you wanna ask me a question in the future then make sure you follow me on Instagram at ceblund. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you hit like and subscribe. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.