About seven years ago when I was in the university, I tried what's called polyphasic sleeping. Basically, instead of sleeping seven to eight hours like a regular person, I slept three hours per night, and I had three twenty minute naps throughout the day. In total, it gave me about four hours of sleep for the entire twenty four hour period. I know. It sounds quite unhealthy and difficult, which it is to a certain extent. In this video, I'm going to share with you my experience with this kind of polyphasic sleeping, why I did it, what were my results, and whether or not it had any long term consequences on my health. I'm also going to have doctor Greg Potter comment on the health effects of polyphasic sleeping, and is there any science behind it. Greg has a PhD in circadian biology. I don't sleep. You don't sleep. I wait. Like I said, I did this type of polyphasic sleeping seven years ago when I was studying in a university. I went to bed at about 10:30 to 11PM, and I slept until 2AM, which was my core sleep. Then I stayed awake for about three to four hours, and I took a twenty minute nap. After that, I stayed up for another three to four hours, took a twenty minute nap, stayed up three to four hours, and took another twenty minute nap. And lastly, I stayed up until my bedtime. I got in total four hours of sleep per night, and I did this for a hundred days. The theory behind polyphasic sleeping is that by taking several naps, you can get the same effects as if you were sleeping seven to eight hours in a row. Can the theory be true that you can get the same amount of sleep from four hours instead of eight hours? No. You cannot, but your body, including your brain, actively defends the amount of a certain type of sleep that it gets, which is the deepest stage of sleep. And so during sleep restriction, it will cram almost as much of that as possible into your sleep opportunity. There are many people from history who have practiced this, such as Thomas Edison, Leonardo da Vinci, and Nikola Tesla. Thomas Edison was said to sleep only three hours per night, and he called sleep a waste of time. He took several naps throughout the day. The reason I did polyphasic sleeping was because I wanted to try it out to see if there was any truth behind those claims, and I wanted to get more time to my day to spend it on either studying or working. This is actually the time I started making YouTube videos, and I was making videos for a few dozen of you people in my dorm bedroom. So I gained about four extra hours per day, which, you know, isn't a lot, but it definitely allowed me to do more things. I was able to get my YouTube channel off the ground, and I finished my thesis in anthropology at the same time. So how did I feel during this period? Surprisingly, not that bad. Yes. It was quite difficult to wake up after sleeping only three hours, but that feeling went away quite fast. It took me about one week to get used to this kind of sleeping. And then I was able to wake up pretty much immediately after the alarm clock. It's obviously a forced sleep schedule, so you do need to use an alarm clock because without it, you're just going to sleep in. One thing I do have to say is that by the end of the day, I was quite tired and was eager to fall asleep. I obviously didn't have any problems falling asleep ever. I fell asleep pretty much immediately whenever I laid down during the naps or at the night. Compared to the regular seven to eight hours, then polyphasic sleeping definitely feels much worse. Even if you get all your naps, you're going to feel less energized than if you had gotten a full night's rest. If a regular seven to eight hour sleep would feel like 4.5 to five out of five, then this polyphasic sleep feels like three out of five. But what about my cognitive performance? Like I said, I was finishing my thesis in anthropology at the time, and I was really productive. My thesis was quite long, and I was like 0.1 points short of graduating with a cum load. I was also making several videos per week on my YouTube channel at the same time. And back then, I was writing the scripts and doing all the editing myself, which took a lot of time. So my cognitive performance and cognition didn't suffer, but I did feel tired. What about my physical performance? I had already been lifting weights for four to five years at that point, and I was decently strong. My gym performance didn't decrease during this time, but it didn't increase either. My performance kind of plateaued because I was sleep deprived and unable to really push myself at the gym. After returning to regular sleep schedule and sleeping seven to eight hours, I started building muscle again and getting stronger. Now seven years after the fact, I'm significantly stronger and with a lot more muscle, but that's also just because of muscle maturation and having more lifting years under my belt. But why did I stop then? To be honest, I stopped because it didn't feel like it was worth it anymore. Yes. You get, like, four extra hours every day, but the quality of those hours isn't that great. The biggest reason was also me wanting to keep getting stronger at the gym. I was nowhere near my genetic potential for muscle growth and muscle strength, which is why I stopped sabotaging myself with the polyphasic sleep. I'm also now much better at time management and I'm much more productive than I was back then. I think this is one important lesson. Sleeping more doesn't make you less productive. It actually increases the effectiveness of your waking hours, so you achieve more with less time. Being sleep deprived might save you a few hours, but you're going to be less productive because of that. So how much sleep should you get then? It's recommended for adults to get seven to nine hours of sleep per night. Sleeping less than seven hours is linked to a higher risk of Alzheimer's, heart disease, and all core mortality, whereas sleeping over nine hours is also linked to a higher risk. Right now, I'm getting about seven to eight hours of sleep every night, and it feels great. My sleep trackers give me a sleep score of 95 to 100 on the majority of nights. What's more important than the duration of sleep is consistency of your bedtime. It's found that sleep regularity is equally as important as the sleep duration, and it could be even a bigger predictor of mortality. I get plenty of deep sleep and REM sleep as well, about two to three hours each. This is also one of the theories behind polyphasic sleeping that by taking these naps, you're able to sufficiently get enough deep sleep and REM sleep while cutting down on the amount of light sleep that you get with no consequences to your health. Light sleep, also called nREM one and two, is the phase of sleep where your body is falling into deep sleep, also called nREM three or slow wave sleep. Light sleep isn't facilitating physical repair like deep sleep nor neurological recovery like REM sleep, which is why some people think it's a waste of time. This was one of the reasons I wanted to try polyphasic sleeping to see if I'm able to get away with less light sleep. I think all stages of sleep matter. And this is clearly true of stage two non REM sleep, which is the form of light sleep that comprises the biggest proportion of your sleep. And there are various features of this particular stage of sleep that clearly have beneficial effects. One of those is called a sleep spindle, and this is a burst of electrical activity that is important to maintaining sleep when there's a chance that you could wake up from sleep. And it's key to neuroplasticity in general. So these sleep spindles are very important to things like routing memories from a short term limited storage capacity vault in a part of the brain called the hippocampus to a longer term larger capacity storage depot, which is the neocortex. And that, in turn, free space in your brain to learn new things. At the same time, I do think it's likely that some stage of sleep matter more than others, hence why your body prioritizes the deepest stage of sleep. I didn't have a sleep tracker back then, so I don't know exactly how much deep sleep or REM sleep I was getting. But I do recall periods of intense dreaming during my naps and even one episode of sleep paralysis where I was feeling like I was dreaming, but I was also not able to wake up at the same time. Fortunately, my sleep quality right now hasn't suffered at all. I sleep great, and I get a lot of deep sleep and REM sleep. So even this period of polyphasic sleeping didn't affect my sleep architecture. What about blood work? I didn't do blood work back then because I was a broke college student, but my blood work right now and over the past few years has been excellent, and I have no health problems. We know from short term experiments that sleep restriction leads to a host of native short term changes. Importantly, though, I think that dose makes the poison, and a few weeks of insufficient sleep each year is unlikely to have any meaningful long term repercussions if your sleep is otherwise sufficient and high quality. But are there any polyphasic sleep schedules that are actually healthy for you? It's very common for people in the Mediterranean countries to take naps in the afternoon, which is called a siesta, and these people live quite long. There are many different types of polyphasic sleeping. Monophysics sleep is the regular sleep where you sleep in one go throughout the night and you take no naps during the day. Segmented sleep is when you sleep four hours per night and you have another four hours sleep during the daytime. This is characteristic to shift work or night shift. Siesta sleep is where you sleep about five to six hours per night and then take a longer nap of one to two hours in the afternoon. Polyphasic sleep is the one where you have a much shorter core sleep and more frequent naps. This is what I did, and it was called the Everyman schedule. I think excess sleep restriction during the nighttime will have negative consequences on your health over the long term. However, taking naps in the afternoon has been found to have some health benefits, especially in terms of mitigating the negative effects from sleep restriction. A 2015 study found that a thirty minute nap could reverse the adverse effects of sleeping only two hours the previous night on stress and immune markers. Moderate napping among middle aged and older adults has been linked to a slower speed of aging and slower cognitive decline compared to no napping at all. In a study done on Greeks, people who took a thirty minute nap at least three times a week had a thirty seven percent lower chance of dying from heart conditions and a twelve percent reduction in coronary mortality. And lastly, an observational study in Switzerland found that those who took a nap at least twice a week were forty eight percent less likely to suffer a heart attack, stroke, or heart failure than those who didn't nap at all. So it looks like taking naps in the afternoon can be healthy, especially if you're not getting enough sleep in the nighttime. It could also be that the reason you see these people getting benefits from napping is because most people under sleep by about thirty to sixty minutes every night. So you might be sleeping seven to eight hours, but your body would really benefit from up to nine hours of sleep, which is why napping can be beneficial. Regardless, if you feel like you need a nap, then you shouldn't feel bad about it. However, you should be able to go without naps most of the time because if you need naps every day, it means your sleep at night is suboptimal. You also have to be careful with not taking a nap too late in the evening because it can keep you up at night. In my opinion, you shouldn't take naps any later than 2PM in the afternoon, and you should avoid napping up to eight hours before your habitual bedtime. Taking a nap a few hours after waking up or immediately in the morning can also be a good idea because it means that you just didn't get enough sleep at night. A key difference between how most of us nap and how polyphasic sleep advocates nap is most of us nap so that we can get more sleep in total, whereas the polyphasic sleep advocates are napping with a goal of reducing the total amount of sleep that they get. But napping can be a double edged sword. For example, if you nap too long, too late in the day, then that can lighten your subsequent sleep. And some people should avoid napping unless essential for safety. And this is to be true of people who have insomnia because a brief nap can impair their ability to consolidate their sleep the following night. In conclusion, I think that the polyphasic sleep experiment was very interesting, and it definitely taught me a lot about sleep and how to nap. Right now, I'm going to stick to a regular sleep pattern of sleeping seven to eight hours per night and taking an occasional siesta nap at lunch a few times a week. Link to my YouTube channel. The YouTube channel, I think, is that great plus PhD and podcast is reason and well-being. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.