VO two max is considered to be one of the best predictors of longevity by doctor Peter Attia. You know, the association between, high VO two max and longevity is so clear. And conversely, the association between low VO two max and mortality is so clear that the idea that VO two max is the single greatest predictor of lifespan of any measurable number we have, is is quite remarkable. I agree that VO two max is incredibly important. However, a lot of people in my community and elsewhere are questioning Peter's claims about the importance of v o two max. In this video, I'm going to go through the studies about v o two max and mortality to see how important it really is. So make sure you click like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. So how important is v o two max then? Indeed, there are a lot of studies finding a link between a higher v o two max and reduced risk of mortality and other chronic diseases. Peter Attia has used this study to exemplify the magnitude of benefits you get from a high VO2 max. They looked at over 7,500,000 US veterans aged 30 to 95. All the participants did a treadmill test in the beginning to measure their VO2 max, and then they were followed up for up to twenty years. What they found was that the people who had the highest v o two max had the lowest risk of mortality over these twenty years. The fittest people had on average a v o two max of 14.3, which is fifty milliliters per kilogram per minute of v o two max. The least fit individuals had a v o two max of four point seven mets, which is sixteen point forty five milliliters per kilogram per minute. The difference in mortality risk between the highest and lowest v o two max was three hundred percent, which is a massive difference. Smoking usually increases your risk of mortality by one hundred to two hundred percent. And in this same study on the veterans, they found that smoking was associated with only a forty percent increased risk of mortality. This is one of the examples that Peter has used to exemplify the importance of v o two max and how big an effect it has on your risk of mortality. And it hints that a low v o two max, as based on this study, will be equally as bad as smoking and even worse. The caveat here is that this 300% difference was between the extremely fit individuals, the fittest of the fit, and the least fit individuals. As you can see from the graph, there's a lot of other subgroups in this study that fall somewhere between very fit and not so fit. A v o two max of 4.7 mets or 16.45 per kilogram per minute, which is the least fit group, is considered the frailty threshold below which you're functionally dependent of caretaking and you're not able to take care of yourself physically. It's the unhealthiest and oldest of the people who are limited in what they do physically. Of course, there's going to be a massive difference in mortality between these people and the fittest in this study. So what's the difference in mortality between the fittest people and the second fittest people? The second highest group of fitness had a VO two max of 12.1 mets or 42.35 per kilogram per minute. The difference in mortality between the extremely fit individuals with a VO two max of 50 was thirty nine percent. That's not as big as the three hundred percent between the extremely fit and the least fit individuals, but it's still quite high. And as you remember in this same study, they found that smoking was linked to a forty percent increased risk of mortality. So the difference in mortality between the extremely fit and the very fit individuals was equal to smoking. What about those who were considered just fit? The ones who were just fit had a v o two max of ten point four mets or thirty six point four milliliters per kilogram per minute, and they had a sixty six percent higher risk of mortality than those who were extremely fit. What about those who were moderately fit? Moderately fit individuals had a v o two max of nine METs or thirty one point five milliliters per kilogram per minute, and they had a one hundred and thirteen percent higher risk compared to the extremely fit individuals. And lastly, those with low fitness had a v o two max of 7.1 or 24.85, which resulted in a hundred and eighty eight percent higher risk of mortality compared to the extremely fit folks. That's still very eye opening and thought provoking. Those who were considered extremely fit with a VO2 max in their fifties still had about the same risk reduction as those who were smoking. Compared to the extremely fit individuals who had a vr two max in their fifties, those who were also very fit with a vr two max in their forties had a thirty nine percent higher risk of mortality, which is equal to smoking in this same study. It's not the four hundred percent difference as between the extremely fit and least fit individuals, but it's still quite a massive difference. So is Peter Etteer right that a higher r e r two max is linked to longevity? It's certainly linked to a reduced risk of all cause mortality and heart disease. Whether or not these people are going to live to 100 is not clear because there are many unpredictable factors that determine how long you're going to live. However, if you do want to live longer, then increasing your r e o two max is one of the most reliable methods of doing so, and most of it comes from reducing your risk of mortality year by year. And if you have a lower risk of mortality year by year, then you are delaying death essentially. The reason that that is the case is that VO two max is a remarkable integrator of the work you have done to get fit. And that's why strength is a very close second. I agree with Peter that a low VO two max is generally a sign of poor health. If you have a low VO two max, then you're probably not exercising because in order to have a higher VO two max, you need to train for it and you need to exercise. People who have a higher VO two max generally are more physically active, and that reflects in better health status. If you don't exercise at all or if you exercise less suboptimal amounts of exercise, then your VO two max is going to be somewhat lower, and that reflects in the mortality data as well. People who exercise generally more and they have a higher VO two max have a lower risk of mortality. Exercising and training cardio specifically improves virtually all your biomarkers, blood sugar, cholesterol, blood pressure, inflammation, etcetera. So it is true that as an umbrella marker, it's very good for assessing the person's overall health. If a person has a low H max, then it's very likely their other clinically relevant biomarkers are also suboptimal, like cholesterol or inflammation. Vice versa, if a person has a very high v o two max, it's very likely that their other biomarkers are also optimal, such as their blood sugar or cholesterol. So how high should your VO2 max be? In the study that I just talked about, the lowest risk of mortality was with a VO2 max of fifty milliliters per kilogram per minute. In this study, the fifty milliliters per kilogram per minute was labeled as extremely fit, but in reality, that's not really, like, athletic level of fitness. Athletes and cyclists usually have a VO2 max of over 70. For the average person who exercises and stays fit, achieving a VO2 max of 50 isn't going to be that difficult even in your fifties and sixties. Unless you're already in your seventies, everyone could have a v o two max of 50 with consistent training. If you have a v o two max in your forties, so let's say you have a v o two max of 42.3, which is would be the very fit individual, if you increase your v o two max to your fifties, then based on the study, you would also reduce your risk of mortality by up to thirty nine percent, which is a significant difference. If your VO two max is even lower than that, so let's say your VO two max is 34.5 and you increase it to forty two point five, then that's also going to reduce your risk of mortality quite significantly. And if you increase it to fifty, then it's going to reduce your mortality even more. And having a higher year to max is significantly more important the younger you are. The younger you are, the higher your year to max should be because year to max starts declining after the age of 18 already. You should easily have your VO2 max above 50 and even above 55 in your twenties. In your sixties, it's going to be quite difficult to have your VO2 max above 50 unless you're a lifelong athlete, but your VO2 max should still be somewhere in your forties when you're 60 years old. And there is evidence that 80 year old athletes are able to maintain a VO2 max of 39, which for their age group is excellent. In your eighties, a VO2 max between 30 to 40 is excellent, But in your twenties, a v h max of 30 to 40 is very poor. There's little to no evidence that a v h max above 60 milliliters per kilogram per minute would be somehow better than the 50 milliliters per kilogram per minute, but that's mostly because there's, you know, no studies on that. In the general population, being with a v two max of 50 is considered extremely fit, but it's actually somewhat yeah. It's just fit, essentially. If you wanna be extremely fit, then then you would have to have a v two max in your sixties. But there's no data that 60 is better than 50 for longevity, at least. It's certainly better for athletic performance. Regardless, because VR2max declines with age, you always want to be ahead of the curve to promote your future physical reserve. If you have a VR2max of thirty milliliters per kilogram per minute in your twenties, then it's going to drop below the disability line in your fifties and sixties. The higher you start from with your VO two max, the more time you have to stay healthy above the frailty line. If you have a VO two max of fifteen milliliters per kilogram per minute in your eighties, you won't be able to even take care of yourself, and you'll be dependent of caretaking. I don't think anyone wants that, which is why it's important to increase your VO two max and build up this VO two max reserve the older you get. Before I continue, I wanna briefly mention to you about one of my favorite longevity gadgets, which is the BontCharge infrared sauna blanket. It's a cheaper and more convenient way to take the sauna anywhere at any time. I've talked a lot about the benefits of regular sauna use. I believe taking a sauna regularly is the second best thing for your longevity after exercise. In fact, the sauna mimics a lot of the health benefits of exercise. The sauna is also effective for excreting heavy metals and other chemicals we're exposed to on a daily basis. The Bond Charge infrared blanket is made of pure leather and it's low in EMF. It's got a rating of 4.9 out of five based on a 176 reviews, which is crazy. But I'm not surprised because I'm using the blanket almost every day and it gets the same job done as a regular sauna. Plus, it's easy to clean and you can store it under your bed. Alright. Back to the video. Another counterargument against the EOTOMAX that is often used is that strength training and muscle mass is much more important than the EOTOMAX. Muscle strength and muscle mass indeed decline with age and low muscle is a predictor of mortality and other chronic diseases. However, muscle mass and muscle strength have a lower association with mortality than neo2max, and a higher VO2max is linked to a greater reduction in mortality risk than a higher muscle mass. Here's a great large study that proves that. A 2018 UK Biobank study looked at data from over half a million people and compared the risk reductions of higher cardiac respiratory fitness and grip strength, both alone as well as together. They found that the individuals with the highest card respiratory fitness had a 35 lower risk of mortality compared to the lowest card respiratory fitness. Those in the middle fitness category had a twenty four percent lower risk in terms of grip strength than the highest grip strength category saw a twenty one percent reduction in all cause mortality risk compared to the lowest grip strength category. So based on that, a higher card respiratory fitness was linked to a greater reduction in mortality risk than a higher grip strength. Even the middle category of cardiovascular fitness outperformed the highest category of grip strength, twenty four percent versus twenty one percent. However, the authors of the study did find that those with both high cardiovascular fitness and high grip strength saw a forty seven percent reduction in mortality risk and sixty nine percent lower risk of heart disease mortality compared to the lowest categories. So if you compare head to head, then cardio respiratory fitness provides greater risk reductions in mortality than higher muscle strength. But ideally, you wanna have both. You wanna have high grip strength and high cardioid spirit fitness, although the benefits of grip strength and muscle strength appear to plateau at the intermediate level. Basically, you want to do both cardio and strength training for maximum risk reduction. In conclusion, cardio respiratory fitness is incredibly important for longevity, and a higher VO two max is just a reflection of your cardio respiratory fitness. To have a higher VO two max, you would need to train it. No one is really born with exceptionally high VO two max. And unless you train for it, unless you actually do some form of exercise, then you're not going to see an increase in your VO two max. Of course, there are ways to increase your VO two max besides cardio. Some people can see an increase in their VO two max with strength training as well if they have a poor cardiac respiratory fitness to begin with, but really optimize your v two max and get it into the lowest risk category of fifty milliliters per kilogram per minute and above, then you do need to do some specific cardio work. If you want to learn more about exercise and longevity and all the other aspects that relate to that, then check out my new book, The Longevity Leap, at the longevityleap.com or the link in the description. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click a like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.