Heart disease is the number one cause of death worldwide. About one third of people will die to some form of cardiovascular diseases. The main hallmark of heart disease is atherosclerotic plaque progression. It's the plaque accumulation in the arteries that begins to block blood flow. There are no gold standard methods of reversing plaque in the arteries. However, there's been a lot of interest recently about an over the counter supplement called nattokinase that could potentially do it. So in this video, I'm going to look at the studies about nattokinase and plaque progression and is it something that could help with that. So So make sure to click a like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. Natokinesis is an enzyme derived from natto which is a fermented soybean dish. Natto is very nutritious and a good source of protein. It's by far the highest food source of vitamin k two. It has about 10 times more vitamin k two than liver or cheeses which are the second highest foods. Vitamin k two has anticoagulation, anti inflammatory, and anti atherosclerotic properties. Dietary natto consumption in humans is linked to reduced heart disease mortality and all cause mortality. In mice, natto also suppresses atherosclerotic plaque progression. So dietary natto is certainly something that could help with your heart health because of its high vitamin k two content. But what about natto kinase supplements? The most recent 2022 study found that natto kinase supplementation at a dose of ten thousand eight hundred fibrinolytic units showed significant reductions in the thickness of the carotid artery intima media and the size of the carotid plaque by 66.5 to 95.4%. A dose of thirty six hundred f u's a day was found to be ineffective in decreasing atherosclerosis progression. That's quite an amazing result for an over the counter supplement. However, this was a retrospective study, not a randomized controlled trial. This makes the results less robust. Fortunately, we also have a 2017 randomized controlled trial from China on eighty two patients. One group was given six thousand f u's of nadakainis a day for twenty six weeks, and the other group got twenty milligrams of simvastatin, which is a statin. Both groups saw a significant reduction in carotid plaque size and common carotid artery interval media thickness compared to baseline. However, the decrease in the nattokinase group was much greater, thirty six point six percent compared to the statin, eleven point five percent. In this study, they use six thousand fus per day, which is above the thirty six hundred f u threshold found to be effective in the 2022 retrospective study. So it appears that to get an effect from nattokinase, you need to consume more than thirty six hundred fus per day. This was highlighted by a 2021 randomized controlled trial that used a dose of two thousand f u's. The dose of two thousand f u's of nattokinase had no effect on subclinical atherosclerosis progression in healthy individuals at low risk for cardiovascular disease. The reason for that might be that number one, they used a dose lower than the thirty six hundred f u's. And number two, these people were already healthy and at low risk of cardiovascular disease, so they might not have had that much plaque. In the 2017 Chinese randomized controlled trial, the dose of six thousand f u's was found to be quite effective. And in the 2022 retrospective study, a dose of ten thousand fus was found to be effective as well. So it appears that a low dose below thirty six hundred or possibly even below six thousand fus is not effective. To know the exact answer to that, we would need to do randomized controlled trials on different doses of natoquinase. You would want to have a low dose group which is below thirty six hundred f u's, a medium dose group between thirty six hundred and six thousand f u's, and a higher dose group above six thousand f u's and up to ten thousand FUs per day. Right now, we don't have that study, but hopefully, we will get it in the near future. Regardless, nadakainis still has many other cardiovascular health benefits. In humans, nadakainis has also been seen to reduce clamping factors in the blood and lower clotting events during long haul fights in high risk individuals. Airplane stroke syndrome describes people getting strokes during long flights because of the reduced blood flow and increased clot formation during long periods of sitting. Nattokinase can be an amazing supplement for reducing blood viscosity and clotting in those people who are at high risk of strokes. Whether or not nadokinase is going to have an effect on reversing atherosclerotic plaque is still up to debate. The studies that I talked about in this video are certainly very interesting and they do, you know, point in some direction. But to know whether or not nattokinase can actually reverse atherosclerotic plaque, we would need to do the different dose study with the low dose, moderate dose, and high dose. But we also have to be safe about it and consider the nature of atherosclerotic plaque progression. Maybe reversing it isn't actually that good of an idea. The calcium buildup is the final stage of atherosclerosis. There's already been damage to the endothelium and the plaque accumulation is just there to stabilize the wound. The gold standard for measuring atherosclerotic plaque is the CT scan that gives you a coronary artery calcium score. Calcium is there to stabilize and harden the plaque. It keeps it stable and reduces the blood clot formation which happens with less stable plaques that are soft plaques. The hard plaque is actually much safer than the soft plaque because it's stable. The soft plaque isn't stable and not calcified which is why it can lead to blood clot formation and subsequent strokes. The safety concern here is that if you keep reducing the hard plaque with whatever method, you could make it less stable and more volatile. Now the evidence that you could completely eradicate plaque from your arteries, you know, we don't have any evidence right now for that. But this is something to remember when you are using some sort of lipid lowering medications or some other supplements that could reduce your plaque scores. The CT scan doesn't pick up soft plaque for which you need a computed tomography angiography or CCTA. Even if you have a coronary artery calcium score of zero, it doesn't mean you don't have soft plaque because the CT scan doesn't pick up soft plaque. And the soft plaque is actually much more dangerous than the calcified heart plaque. It's been found that thirteen to sixteen percent of people with a coronary artery calcium score of zero still have plaque. So this is one of the safety concerns that also needs to be addressed and monitored with the future trials on nattokinase. Overall, do I think that nattokinase is good? Yes. Personally, I do think that it's good. In my eyes, at least, it has quite compelling evidence, but I'm still eager to wait for the future trials with the three different doses. Eating natto is also a good idea and it is linked to a lower risk of heart disease mortality and all cause mortality. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.