Alright. First question, what are some recommended supplements for people in their forties? So I think that there are some supplements that would be more beneficial to take if you are older. Now forties is still very young. I think there's not a lot of, physiological differences between people and their health between thirties, forties. And only starting in your fifties, you start to see some of changes in hormones and other aspects of health that would warrant some like specific interventions or specific supplement protocols that will be more beneficial for those people. So I think people in their forties, you know, you wanna you wanna take the same supplements in your forties as you would take in your thirties because there's not a lot of differences in your, you know, let's say muscle mass and VOT max, like drastic differences. But in your fifties there will be some more, like, significant changes. Now what are the supplements in your fifties? Like whether E is gonna start to have some changes in your hormones and health, then, I have made some posts actually on Twitter as well about the supplements I would start to take once I reach my fifties. And those supplements are number one, glycine and NAC. I would still continue taking them. Right now, I'm not taking NAC on a daily basis. I'm taking it, you know, a few times a month or something, but I do take Glycine daily for the collagen and glutathione benefits. But, I would add NAC in my fifties because after the age of forty forty five, you see a decline in natural Gulazan production because of age related changes and they find that even healthy individuals who are otherwise healthy, they have a healthy diet, they have healthy body composition, even these people see a decline in gulathan levels because of the natural process of aging. So in your fifties you would benefit from higher, let's say, support for gulathan production and glycine NAC are the best precursors for that. And we have a lot of clinical trials as well. The combination of Glycine and NAC has been shown to, like, reduce some of the hallmarks of aging or aspects of that including inflammation, waist circumference, increase, grip strength, gait speed, cognition, and those kind of things. So I think it's a very effective supplement, cheap as well, and you would technically start to benefit more from Glycine and NAC on a daily basis after the age of 50 or after the age of 45 depending on your health status. But I personally will start taking Glycine and NAC on a daily basis, so I would add NAC on a daily basis. So I'll at least take two point five grams of NAC daily plus at least two point five grams of glycine, but I'm taking, you know, already ten grams of glycine nowadays. So, yeah, I would just add the extra NAC to there. The third supplement would be Melatonin because Melatonin levels also decline with age. Now the decline in Melatonin already starts after puberty, so in your twenties already you're producing a significantly less amount of Melatonin than you did in your teenage years And once you reach your fifties and more significantly in your seventies and eighties, you see a much greater drop in Melatonin levels. So I'm not taking Melatonin daily right now because I sleep well. My body is producing still adequate amounts of Melatonin, maybe not optimal amounts even in your twenties, but I'm not taking it every day. In my fifties, I will start taking Melatonin, like, every day and I would increase the dosage as well. So right now, in my twenties, late twenties, and in my thirties, I'll get away with like zero point three, zero point five milligrams melatonin to reach the optimal level of melatonin. And in my fifties, I will probably increase it to like one milligram every day. And And in my seventies and eighties probably I would increase it even more, so like one point five milligrams because people in their seventies and eighties they produce like a fraction of the melatonin that you produced when you were 20 years old as well. So the older you get there, the greater the decline in melatonin tends to be. And this decline in melatonin isn't, like, inherently a good thing. Melatonin has benefits on sleep. It has other benefits as well in terms of antioxidant defense and anti inflammatory status. So I think that, melatonin is like, longevity hormone in that sense and an anti aging hormone. So, yeah, I'm definitely going to start taking melatonin regularly when I reach, 50. The fourth supplement I will take would be creatine definitely. So if you're young, then you technically don't need creatine either because you already have, you know, relatively speaking, the higher amount of muscle mass and muscle strength and muscle speed and cognitive function as well and bone density. So, you know, you technically don't need creatine in your twenties and thirties, even forties. Perhaps it doesn't mean that you wouldn't benefit from taking creatine. You would just have slightly higher muscle strength and, and the other you get the other benefits of creatine as well. So you're like optimizing it in your twenties, thirties, forties. But But after the age of 50, your health status declines slightly. Specifically, you see a decline in muscle mass, muscle strength, and bone density also starts to slightly deteriorate by that age. So at that age in the fifties, creatine is, yeah, like a health span supplement that, protects against some of that decline. So I'm a pretty big fan of creatine for that reason and, I would take it more consistently in my fifties, sixties, and seventies. So right now I do take creatine not every day because I'm also trying to, like, maximize my VO to max or trying to increase my VO to max, currently. And I'm all I mean, I don't technically need to increase my VO to max anymore because it's very high already but I'm just, you know, in my age I'm trying to okay, you know, it's all downhill from here in terms of VO2 max. So VO2 max peaks when you're 18 years old and naturally speaking, you know, my VO2 max is much higher right now than it was when I was 18. So it doesn't mean that you can't have a high v two max even later in life but it just means that you know starting on from thirties, forties it's gonna be harder to have a higher v two max as well. So right now I'm kind of reaping the benefits off the high v two max to build a buffer or build a like a reserve for that. And, later in my fifties, the shift in my opinion should be more towards muscle mass and bone density because, that's where more harm comes from for, people after the age of 50. So that's where I'll focus more on creatine. And, creatine has cognitive benefits as well. So it's been shown to improve memory function in elderly people. So, yeah, if you're like 70, 80 years old, like, I would definitely take give creatine to your grandparents and parents, because, it's very cheap, safe, and effective. So it's one of the most effective supplements for, you know, physical performance and currently, like cognitive performance as well. And lastly, the fifth supplement I'll start taking after DG fifty is gonna be nattokinase. So nattokinase, it mostly has has the benefits for heart health and cardiovascular disease risk reduction. So it has antithrombotic, anti blood coagulation effects and, anti atherosclerotic effects. So there are a few clinical trials showing how nattokinase potentially could reduce arterial plaque or, the plaque accumulation. And it definitely has, you know, protection, like reduces the the risk of thrombosis and those kind of things, which does tend to increase after the age of 50. So, men especially are at a higher risk of heart disease much sooner than women. So, you know, nattokinase is like a very cheap and effective supplement for for that in my opinion. And the dose would be at least six thousand, fibrinolytic units and I would probably start taking like ten thousand fus per day. So these are the list of the supplements I will take after my age of 50. You know, a lot of some of them I'm taking already right now. There might be a few other ones there that I'll add but, these are the ones, I think is like the top five. Before I continue on, I'll briefly mention to you about one of my favorite longevity gadgets which is the Bond Charge infrared sauna blanket. It's a cheaper and more convenient way to take the sauna anywhere at any time. I've talked a lot about the benefits of regular sauna use. I believe taking a sauna regularly is the second best thing for your longevity after exercise. In fact, the sauna mimics a lot of the health benefits of exercise. The sauna is also effective for excreting heavy metals and other chemicals we're exposed to on a daily basis. The bond charge infrared blanket is made of pure leather and it's low in e m f. It's got a rating of 4.9 out of five based on a 176 reviews, which is crazy. But I'm not surprised because I'm using the blanket almost every day and it gets the same job done as a regular sauna. Plus, it's easy to clean and you can store it under your bed. Alright. Back to the video. Next question. Three simplest ways to increase VO to max. So, VO to max is something that, is worthwhile to increase. There's a lot of opinions about whether or not VO to max is important, you know, based on the research that I've done and I've, you know, scoured the literature for for, quite extensively. And, I do think that VO2 max e is one of the best, like, physiological markers of health span for sure. And, you know, if you extend your health span, it also has some, effects on your lifespan. So how do you increase the VO two max? There's many ways you can do it. There's no, I guess, better or worse way. The most important thing to do is to just exercise, specifically some aspects of cardiovascular exercise. So if you just do more cardio, you're going to see an increase in your VO two max. And, just doing more, so adding more hours to the cardio no matter how much you're doing right now will still tend to increase your VO two max. Because if you look at the elite athletes, they, you know, exercise hours and hours per week and they have the highest VO two maxes out there. So, the more you do, the higher your VO two max typically will be. But, you know, what is the kind of sweet spot or the bare minimum effective dose? So if you do like HIIT cardio once a week, then that generally will give you benefits for increasing your VO2 max. And but if you add more of some of the zone two workouts or if you add an extra HIIT workout session, then you will see greater benefits from there as well almost like in a linear fashion. The issue is that if you do too much exercise or if you add a lot of high intensity exercise to your workout plan, weekly workout plan, then you might see some of the symptoms of overtraining related to sleep, stress, your, glycemic, like, levels or glucose levels can also worse worse than if you're doing too much exercise. So you need to kind of figure out, okay, what is the sweet spot for you? But regardless, just doing more will increase your VO2 max. It's just that some of that may have some collateral, damage. But in my opinion, the sweet spot is here like once a week, some sort of hit cardio, a short hit session, twenty to thirty minutes, and, one to two zone two cardio sessions as well once a week. The top three methods to do so the numb so the first one would be I just do more cardio, whatever type of cardio it is, HIIT or zone two cardio. The second method is to do this, longer intervals with your HIIT workout. So the research suggests that doing the HIIT intervals that last over two minutes, gives a greater increase in VO two max than the intervals that last shorter than two minutes. So anything like two, four, six minutes, I think is the sweet spot for doing this interval. So that means two to six minutes of 80 to 90% of your max heart rate in this into intervals. So that can be, running, cycling, rowing, whatever the kind of exercise you're doing, swimming. It's just you wanna be 80 to 90% of your max heart rate for two to six minutes. I like the four minute intervals. I think it's pretty intense and, also like feels bearable or like, yeah, endurable. If you have six minute intervals at 80 to 90% of your max heart rate, then that's a pretty, like, pretty intense and hard to pull off. Two minute intervals are also pretty good, but I think four minute intervals might be slightly superior. So there's this Norwegian method, four minutes of this 80 to 90% max heart rate, four minutes rest for four rounds. So that, has quite a lot of research as well that it's very effective for increasing VO to max. So longer intervals, are better than shorter intervals. And you want to do them at the one to one ratio. So like if you do two minute interval then you rest for two minutes or have like this low intensity period for two minutes and then you repeat it. But if you have a four minute interval then you repeat then you rest for four minutes as well. And the third method is to do more, low heart rate training. So this is usually called like zone two training especially, but it doesn't have to be always zone two even. Zone two is just, I guess, more effective in terms of that. But any form of low heart rate training is also beneficial for increasing your overall cardiac respiratory fitness. So the intervals are great for increasing VO2max, max but, sometimes some people might need to focus on their base. So this, base of their cardio respiratory fitness and that's best trained with a zone two or just lower heart rate training. So the low hundreds. So humping between a 100 to a 120 beats per minute with your heart rate that is, one of the best ways to increase your base for your, cardio respiratory fitness. And if you're older then that number might be even lower. So So if you're in your sixties, then your number for this could be, you know, eighties, low eighties or, low nineties even. Next question. What will you do in your thirties that makes the biggest bang for your buck that is not exercise? So, you know, I'm gonna be 30 in one month. So, you know, new decade, we'll see how it goes. I think I'm, you know, much fitter than I was when I was 18. So my VO2 max is much higher than I was 18. My muscle mass, muscle strength and all my biomarkers are all much optimal than they were back when I was 18 years old. So I guess, you know, technically speaking, many people would say that this is the peak and after that, once I enter my thirties, this is where the decline begins with health. But, you know, I'm a very, you know, I'm a very consistent person and I think that I'll maintain the same health and probably improve some aspects of my health even in my thirties. And maybe my decline only begins my forties. So we'll see. But what will I focus on or what will be be the biggest bang for my buck in my thirties? So I'm already exercising quite a lot and I think the second best thing for your health after exercise is a sauna. Regular sauna, four times a week of a sauna is what I'm gonna be aiming for. And I'm very bullish on a sauna therapy because I've just seen so many, so much research and so many studies over the last few years showing how, how big the risk reduction is for heart disease and Alzheimer's and old cause mortality from regular sauna use. And I've, you know, mentioned it many times as well that it's not this kind of a healthy user bias that many people would like to think that people who take the sauna are just health conscious and that's why they, live longer. It's important to realize that, yeah, the the research is done in Finland where everyone has pretty much access to the sauna. So Finland has a population of 5,000,000 people and there's 3,000,000 saunas in Finland. Almost everyone has a sauna at their home and every gym, every kind of office building and stuff has a sauna. So it's part of, culture. It's like a national identity to be a sauna person in Finland. So everyone takes a sauna very regularly. So that And that includes the normies. That includes the people who are not taking care of their health at all. So they drink beer, they eat cheeseburger or whatever, just just regular people, they still go to the sauna and, they they, like, reap the benefits from there. Now Finland still has a pretty high degree of, like, heart disease compared to other, countries, but that's just because, yeah, they, you know, Finnish, I guess, diet culture or something like that isn't, let's say, the same as it is, like, in the Mediterranean countries, so to say. So the diet is slightly worse in Finland. So if they didn't do the sauna, then they're probably rates of heart disease would be even, higher, if that makes sense. For the, like, just the average, average, a Finnish person who doesn't care about their health at all, if that makes sense. But, yeah. I'm very bullish about the sauna. I'm taking it already pretty regularly, but in my thirties, I think that will be the biggest bang for my buck, for cardiovascular health benefits, first and foremost. Next question, how to decrease stress levels? Any breath method, supplements to deal with it? So, there was a recent, meta analysis in, 2024 that did look at all the different interventions for stress management and he found that the most effective ones were things like mindfulness and meditation based interventions. So I think it matters less what type of meditation it is or what kind of mindfulness practice it is. It's just that, these practices tend to have benefits on stress and anxiety and, and the kind of stress reduction. So if you are a person who has higher amounts of stress, then I think you would benefit from, you know, investigating some different types of meditation. And, you know, even like forest bathing can be a form of mindfulness. So the forest bathing in its technical term, so not just being in a forest and listening to a podcast, which can also be of course, relaxing activity. But the forest bathing itself as a therapy as it was originated in Japan, it also just involves being in the forest, not being, distracted by anything else and just kind of soaking in the environment, soaking in the sounds and the sights, looking around and just kind of dwelling in the forest. So that is almost like a form of meditation or mindfulness. You just pay attention to the surroundings and not be distracted by a podcast or, your smartphone. So the most authentic way of doing forest bathing would be to, yeah, just be in the forest and bathe in the forest as a form of, like, therapy or stress reduction, not just, yeah, walking in a forest with a podcast. But, you know, with forest bathing it's, you know, and with whatever meditation as well. Any other form of stress reduction, you need to be aware of, you you know, how does it affect you. Some people actually get more stressed out by being in a forest or they might get more stressed out or more anxious if they're meditating. So you need to figure out, okay, what does what does work for you. Are there any supplements for stress reduction? So, you know, Ashwagandha has quite a lot of, clinical trials that it does help with stress and anxiety. So I think that is probably the easiest and most effective supplement for stress reduction. It has quite nice, evidence. Some other supplements would be like maybe L theanine that can help with anxiety and possibly glycine as well in my opinion. So it has this GABAergic effects, so it can, make you more calm and, it does help with sleep as well. So, you know, I don't think adding a lot of supplements would be a a wise move. If you're stressed, it's more important to figure out what's the root cause of the stress and try to manage it as well as, you know, do, like, more physical things in terms of that, like, you know, moderate exercise, maybe sauna can help with stress in some sense, getting enough sleep. You know, kind of the fundamentals are more important before using the supplements. But the supplements that do work are as well as theanine and glycine, maybe magnesium as well if you are, you know, magnesium deficient. And stress does increase the demand for magnesium. Next question, I supplement with omega three high dose, but I eat many nuts as well. Is my omega three wasted? So omega threes are obviously quite important and beneficial for health. Omega sixes that you get from nuts and seeds, you know, there are essential omega six fatty acids as well, so you don't necessarily want to eliminate all omega sixes, you know, at least you want at least not the whole food omega sixes. So eating a few nuts and seeds isn't inherently harmful as long as you are getting enough omega threes. And the way to know that is to just, measure your omega three index. So that is the only way to know if you are getting too much omega sixes pretty much or if you are getting enough omega threes. So the omega three index looks looks at the amount of DHA and EPA in red blood cells and, the lowest heart disease and Alzheimer's risk is with a omega three index above six percent I've seen in studies, but I would say that eight percent is, like a more optimal cut off point. So you wanna have your omega three index at least eight percent and ideally higher, you know, up to ten percent would be maybe the best. And, if the omega three index is below four percent then, that's yeah, like you're getting too much of these, omega sixes and your body might be under higher inflammation as well because of that. So, if you nuts and seeds isn't going to waste your omega three intake, it usually maybe so it's hard to just eat that many nuts and seeds as well for you to offset the balance in the first place. So usually in the modern diet, the omega three index is offset because of, so, because of like just industrialized food and processed food intake. And the omega six to three ratio, so the ratio between the six and three specifically, that should ideally be like three to one or less. So if the ratio is 10 to one as it tends to be on the modern diet, then that is, yeah, you're getting too much omega sixes. But if your ratio is three to one, then that's, kind of a natural balance that you would achieve if you were to eat a completely natural, diet. And maybe, like, you know, one to one is kind of unfeasible or even not something that you want to aim for because, you know, omega sixes are also considered essential fatty acids, At least the ones from nuts and seeds. So like the whole food omega six six fatty acids, not the ones that you get from a processed food. Next question. If you don't have a sauna, does a very hot shower bring the same or near benefits? So, the benefits of the sauna come from hyperthermia, so your body temperature rises above normal and, you know there are many ways to achieve that. You can take a hot bath. So I think hot bath is probably more effective than a shower because, your body temperature will rise much higher in a hot bath than in a hot shower. So the I guess the way the water if you're submerged in the water then it feels you feel the effects of the temperature much more. So the same with a with a cold bath. So a cold bath feels very colder than a cold shower. So a a warm bath, you know, the temperature might not be even that high but it feels super hot because of your inside the bath. But does the shower give the benefits? I think it's very hard to reach hyperthermia with the hot shower because you would have to first take the hot shower for, you know, ten minutes. And the benefits of the sauna therapy come from, twenty minutes in 70 degrees Celsius. So, the same with the hot bath. You would wanna be in the hot bath for, you know, at least fifteen to twenty minutes, I would imagine. Other ways to mimic some of the benefits of the sauna would be to exercise. So cardiovascular exercise mimics a lot of the effects of sauna therapy by increasing your body temperature, by increasing, blood flow and increasing, heart rate. So, you know, doing cardio is the second best thing for for getting the benefits of, of the sauna. And if you do a lot of cardio, then you kind of don't need to do that much much sauna sauna either. So I don't do the sauna on the days that I do cardio. I do only the sauna after resistance training workouts because if you combine, the sauna after the resistance training workout then the then it does appear to support the recovery from resistance training and actually like give greater benefits for muscle growth as well. So, it kind of enhances the recovery and, enhances the hypertrophy response. And combining the sauna with exercise also yields a greater increase in VO2 max than exercise alone. So there is some unique benefits that you get from the sauna as well, mostly because of probably the increase in heart rate. So if you're in a sauna, your heart rate is slightly elevated, so you're doing like low heart rate training when you're in a sauna. And, if you're doing the sauna, you know, four times a week for twenty minutes, then you're racking up, you know, over an hour of, low heart rate training as well. Next question, does sex help increase longevity? So that's a spicy question. I think, you know, based on the research then people who have sex, generally have health, better health as well. And the older you are and, especially if the older you are. So if you're able to have sex in your sixties, eighties, maybe nineties even, then it's just it's more like a sign of virility and, and health. So like sexual having reproductive health for longer and having a greater sexual performance in your later life is just a sign of it's more like a biological age thing. It's like a biological youth thing. If you're sexually dysfunctional already in your forties then it's just a sign of usually like cardiovascular problems because erectile dysfunction is very connected to, heart disease and, Alzheimer's even. So, So, it's just kind of a reflection of overall overall, like a biological health. Now is there any causal effects from sex on longevity? I I think there might be so because sex supports some aspects of physical health and, and it also supports emotional health and like mental health in other ways, especially, you know, if you are with a like a, I guess like a long term partner then the social capital or the emotional capital that you build emotional reserve, that is linked to longevity as well. So people who have like long term relationships, whether that be friends, family, or a partner, or children, then these people, do have, reduced risk of mortality, especially the older you are. Again, in your forties, it matters much less, but it does appear to matter a lot more when you're 60. So 60, seventies, eighties, that's where the social and emotional reserve has a much bigger effect on, your mortality risk, so to say. And loneliness and social isolation has a much bigger effect on your mortality risk the older you are. If you're younger then, it matters a bit less. But, yeah, sex does have benefits for, you know, emotional health and physical health, so it does pretty much support longevity. And, being able to conceive as a as a woman, being able to get children slightly later in life is also linked to longevity. So the women who are able to get children and they have children in their forties, they, tend to live longer as well than the women who, can't conceive after 40. So that's because of, again, the sexual health and reproductive health being a sign of overall biological health, if that makes sense. Next question. How did you do a fat loss phase, lower carbs, or lower fat? So I, yeah, I mentioned in my previous video that I had lost a little bit of weight. So, like, two to three kilos of a 100% fat. So I actually gained 0.2 kilograms of muscle in my arms and legs and I lost just fat during this process, which was, you know, very nice surprise. And, the biggest reason for that was I was doing more exercise, cardio specifically, and I was eating slightly less calories. And, yeah, I just reduce usually I reduce fat intake when I am, dieting because it's just easier to do that. If you reduce fat intake, your food volume stays pretty much the same. So you're not really feeling like you're dieting because you you eat the same amount of food. You're just getting less calories, which is kind of the key to long term weight loss success. You wanna feel like you're not dieting. So that's why higher fiber or higher protein meals tend to promote weight loss so much better than than, the opposite. Because you're getting lower calories while still feeling very satiated and, like full from there. Whereas if you have you know, you just need like a cup of, olive oil and that's like a whole lot of calories and, that can prevent you from losing weight. Whereas if you eat like a cup of broccoli or some vegetables, then yeah, you're gonna feel quite full after that. So I always like to reduce the fat because I don't notice any benefits from a high fat intake. Like, I'm I noticed a much bigger benefit from a higher carb intake, personally, me. So I always keep my protein relatively high. I did reduce the protein this time as well and I didn't lose muscle which is also like surprising and I guess, a good thing. And, carbs have, you know, benefits for just you're able to maintain a higher physical performance and maintaining the higher physical performance is also important for muscle preservation. So if you go on a diet, you lose weight and you lose strength, your like strength at the gym goes down, then, that also like accelerates the muscle, loss. But if you're able to still put out relatively the same amount of, you know, weight at the gym and intensity then you're able to maintain the muscle as well much better because the intensity of the exercise is one of the biggest determinants of muscle preservation and muscle growth. So if you're even on like a completely zero calorie intake but you exercise you lose a lot less muscle than if you're on a zero calorie diet and not exercising, if that makes sense. Because the muscle needs a signal to stay around and the exercise intensity is the bigger biggest determinant of muscle preservation. So yeah that's what I how I do it. I just reduce the fat and it's very easy for me. Next question. I'd like to gain weight healthy. Do you have any recommendations for the food training? So the most important thing to gaining weight in a healthy way is to do resistance training. So I guess, you know, you want to gain weight and, by that you mean gain muscle because, you know, no one really wants to gain fat mass and, and it's it's much unhealthier to gain extra fat mass for no reason. Whereas gaining muscle typically results in a net positive effect on your health and most people don't have that much muscle. So like average people don't have, they have like a muscle deficit in most cases and they have too much fat mass. So gaining weight in a healthy way is to do resistance training because that's the single most important thing for muscle growth. So if you just eat calories and you don't lift weights then you're just gonna gain weight, from the fat mass. But if you do have the signal from the resistance training then the extra calories that you eat would be more allocated towards muscle growth. So that is the most important thing that you need to do. So like three times a week, some form of resistance training, that is gonna be the most important signal for muscle growth. And the extra calories, so you still so it depends on where you're starting from. If you're like a beginner at the gym, then you can gain muscle even without being in a calorie surplus because it's like a period of newbie gains as it's called. Now if you're more advanced and, you're already lifting weights, then it's gonna be harder to gain muscle in a calorie maintenance phase, so you would need to increase your calories slightly. The surplus doesn't have to be very large. Anything above 500 extra calories per day would already be predominantly going into fat mass. So just increase your calories by 500 calories per day. That's the most, even like 200 is enough in a lot of cases. But, yeah, 200 extra calories per day. And, it doesn't even have to be protein that you increase. So you just want to aim for the 1.6 grams per kilogram of lean body mass for protein for maximum muscle growth benefits, which is 0.8 grams per pound of lean body mass. And that is lean body mass. So there's a few, you know, like 15% of your body weight is still gonna be fat mass for for most people. So, kind of subtract that. So if you aim for like 0.7, 1.5 grams per kilogram, for total body mass then you're gonna aim for for that you're gonna get that amount. So you don't need to eat any more protein than that. So the extra 500 calories you would want to aim for will come from either fats or carbs. Now I personally believe that being in a surplus surplus with carbohydrates would be more beneficial because, carbs have a direct, like, link with muscle growth and, kind of more positive weight gain in that scenario. So, fat doesn't really have that much of a role to play in muscle growth. Yes, you need certain essential fatty acids but you can cover that from a, like, a relatively low amount of fat. So, like, if you eat 70 to 80 grams of fat per day then you're getting all the essential fatty acids that your body needs. And the rest of the calories for optimal muscle growth would come from, carbohydrates. So the insulin and, the glycogen replenishment from carbs, it has a kind of a it's a it's a league of its own in terms of muscle growth. So just the anabolic effects of insulin are quite effective in a small surplus and, the glycogen replenishment as well would just give you better performance at the gym. And if you perform better at the gym you're gonna build more muscle as well. So I guess that's kind of my recommendations for optimal macros and, workout as well. Next question. Are you planning to start taking rapamycin? So I'm currently not taking Rapamycin. It's this, considered to be one of the most, I guess, biggest potential for having a life extension in humans as a pharmaceutical. So I'm not taking it right now. I'm waiting for a few more studies to come out before I start taking it. I do think that it's probably going to have some longevity benefits in humans as well, especially elderly people. So usually it's thought to be like a immunosuppressant and that's why it's considered that it might actually be harmful, but, some of the recent studies do show that it actually has benefits in strengthening the immune system in the elderly people. And I guess the difference is, the dosage frequency and, how you pulse it. So you don't wanna probably take it like every day and for longevity benefits the recommended frequency is like once a week, a certain dose. So, I'll probably start doing that in a few years because right now, like I said, I'm trying to really build my physical reserve. So I'm trying to build my muscle mass, muscle strength and VO2 max reserve. So I'm inclined to think that the rapamycin, it wouldn't support those goals. Maybe it will, but, you know, currently I don't need to take rapamycin at my age. So I'll I'll wait a few years. And the same applies to my dog. So we have the Apollo, a small Maltipoo. He's only 11 old at the moment. And, we do plan to start giving him certain supplements as well and Rapamycin because there's the dog aging project by doctor Matt Caberlain, which has pretty interesting findings like a preliminary findings that yeah. The dogs that get rapamycin appear to be slightly healthier or something, but the the results of the those studies will also come out in a few years. So we'll wait a few years until Apollo grows up a little bit and then we'll consider giving him rapamycin as well. And the same for me, I'm gonna wait for the dog study to see, like whether or not I'll start taking rapamycin myself. Next question. When is your next retreat to India? Because we're coming. So, yeah, I just came back from my retreat in India at the iVo Clinic in this five star hotel and, yeah, it's it's one of the best, I guess, biohacking experiences that I've experienced and it's just, you know, this three sixty full assessment, diagnostic assessment of health, a 180 biomarkers with blood test, DEXA scan, VO2 max test, full body MRI, all the different kind of scans, liver scan, ultrasound, echocardiogram, you know, you name it. Whatever kind of test you want to do, they'll they'll do it for you. And of course, also there's some other, like therapies, IV therapy, hyperbaric oxygen, red light therapy, HydraFacial, PRP, you have dentist, eye doctor, physiotherapy, massages, you know, a lot of things you can do there and seven days. I'm gonna go back in January 2025. So, January 3 is the current, date that will go. And you can check it out at simlan.co/retreat or check the link in the description. Next question. How did you lower your LDL? So my LDL from the last blood test was, lower. It was 75 milligrams per deciliter, which I think is a pretty optimal at least, for my age. So I'm not taking any pharmaceuticals. I'm not taking any lipid lowering drugs or anything of that. This is just with, lifestyle and diet and a few supplements that might influence, LDL and like, levels. But the biggest thing that I did was just reduction in saturated fat intake. So I'm just getting my fat mostly from fish, olive oil and a few nuts and seeds. So these are the only like fats that I really consume. I also consume like dairy, but dairy doesn't appear to influence LDL as much as some other fats. So like more animal based fats like butter or stuff. So yeah, I think that's the only things that I did. I did take some psyllium husk as well as a like a food additive on my on my food but, I think that was the biggest changes. I also exercised a lot more. So exercise is important for, lipid panel and, maybe the sunlight exposure during the summer also might have affected that because your body converts the cholesterol in your blood to vitamin d three sulfate. So if your cholesterol is high then it might be that you're not getting this infrared radiation from the sunlight. So yeah, these are the few things that I think were responsible. Next question, top five things that improved your sleep. So I've always had relatively good sleep. I've never struggled with sleep. I've actually done some, you know, weird sleep experiments like, doing the polyphasic sleep where I sleep four hours a night and I have multiple naps. So, you know, I've even even after that, I never struggled with insomnia or some sleeping issues. So, what are the things that I do notice that improve my sleep, I'm getting very high scores with my sleep tracker. So always like above nineties and, I think the biggest thing is exercise. So just exercising a lot more, I know this has a the biggest effect on how long I sleep and how well I sleep. So always on the days that I do exercise, you know, at least thirty minutes, I sleep better and I sleep longer. Whereas on the days that I don't exercise, my sleep demand is so low that I might sometimes just end up sleeping three, four hours and I wake up and I feel just normal. So if I don't exercise, then I don't need to sleep either almost, at least based on how I feel. And if I do exercise, then I sleep very, well. So number one is exercise and there is studies that the higher amount of physical activity you do, the greater sleep quality you have. So the extreme exercisers even, they report the best sleep quality probably because their sleep pressure and sleep drive is much higher. So the more exercise you do and the more sunlight you're exposed to, the higher your sleep pressure is. So do some exercise, get some sunlight. I think those are the top two biggest determinants of sleep quality. Number three is, the blue light routine. So in the evening you want to limit blue light exposure, artificial light exposure. So these kind of computer screens, UV lights and smartphones they do reduce melatonin production and it doesn't affect me that much but, I do I do remember when I started using the blue blockers, I noticed that my deep sleep increased by 15. So before it was 15% lower, after I started using the blue blocking glasses, it was 1515% higher. So yeah, that is quite underrated in my opinion. Number four is earlier time machine eating. So I've sometimes in the past I have eaten, you know, one hour before bed, two hours before bed. Right now, I'm actually like four or five hours before bed and I noticed that my sleep is better if I eat a bit earlier. So if you have a dinner too late, then, it tends to reduce your sleep quality. Even if you kinda don't feel it, Your sleep tracker will still be with worse results even if you don't like feel that you're sleeping worse. Your sleep tracker will still still show you that you're getting slightly less deep sleep or REM sleep whatever that may be. And lastly the fifth tip was just staying in bed longer. So I'm the kind of person, you know, I'll wake up at four or 5AM, I might not feel that I want to sleep longer And a lot of the times in the past, I just woke up and started working or something. But, over the last year, I've just decided to stay in bed for a bit longer and that usually results in me sleeping for another hour. And, I think that is quite, you know, beneficial because I'll end up getting eight hours of sleep instead of six or seven. So I think, you know, getting eight hours of sleep if you're exercising regularly and under higher amounts of physical stress from exercise and other things, then, it's more beneficial to have, like, at least eight hours of sleep. And just staying in bed instead of immediately getting up, you know, ends up you sleeping a bit longer as well based on my experience. So these are the top things that have affected my sleep, the most. Next question, what oil do you use to fry your sweet potato fries? So I don't, you know, do any like this kind of classical sweet potato fries or anything of that. I just chop the sweet potato into this circles. I put them on the oven on this baking sheet and I just cook them in the oven in two two hundred degrees Celsius for twenty minutes. And I mean it's not fries as in the same way as McDonald's fries or something like that because they're not very fatty or crispy but they all do develop a slight crunch to them so, you know, this is kind of healthy, mildly sweet potato fry fry version. So I don't use any oil for that. I just use the sweet potato, maybe a little bit of salt. And I mean sometimes I might add a little bit of olive oil on there but, very rarely. So in most cases it's just the regular sweet potato and you can actually get, yeah, like quite legitimate, you know, crunchy sweet potatoes or, you know, kind of semi fries. Not the real thing but they taste really good if you just cook them like that. Next question, thoughts on aethaxanthin daily dose? So aethaxanthin in my opinion is a very interesting supplement and, I have become more interested in it over the last few months. Mostly because I've seen, a few of these meta analysis of clinical trials that azaxanthin helps with blood pressure, metabolic syndrome, cholesterol and inflammation. But the reason I am taking it is because of, the skin, skin protective effects. So azaxanthin is a carotenoid and it does protect against the UV radiation from the sun. So, it's summer I don't, you know, use sunscreen that much in Estonia. I don't need to because there's not that much sun and I don't go outside if the sun is like blazing. But yeah, the Azaxanthin twelve milligrams a day appears to be good for skin anti aging and protecting the skin against UV radiation. So yeah, I'm taking that and it has the other effects as well on the lipids and blood pressure and inflammation. Although, you know, I don't have problems with those markers. And the last question is, do you take Novoscore supplement? So the Novoscore supplement, it, is supposedly targeting these different hallmarks of aging. It has calcium, alpha ketoglutarate, magnesium malate, vitamin c, fisetin, and, lithium. So a few other ingredients. I do think that it's a smart product. I will make a more thorough video about the ingredients the same way I did with a Brian Johnson supplement stack. So I think that it's interesting and, I guess it's with this with the right idea in mind and it's kind of convenient to use, I'm not exactly sure how effective it is. So because some of the ingredients might not be, that evidence based, yet. So it's hard to say which of the ingredients is the most effective out of those, entire list of ingredients. So calcium alpha ketoglutarate has interesting animal studies, but the human studies are very lacking for longevity purposes and the calcium alpha ketoglutarate may have benefits on bone density but that's pretty much it on human trials right now. And with Fisetin there's no like human clinical trials on this senolytics. So like Apigene and Quercetin, we don't know if they work in humans for reducing senescent cells and even then we don't know like, okay, you remove senescent cells, how many of these senescent cells you need to remove and what's the correct dosage and the pulsing frequency, etcetera. So, and in the recent National Institute of Aging ITP trial, the fisetin didn't extend lifespan either in animals. So, yeah. I'll do a thorough overview of the NovusCore supplement, but, I don't take it regularly. I do have it, some of the satchel, then I find it it's pretty convenient if you're traveling. So if you're traveling and you don't have, you know, all your supplements with you, then just using this single satchel can be useful for, I guess, boosting your immunity or, yeah, just having like a slight antioxidant effect to counteract maybe the the stress from traveling. So that's the only way I use it, but that's pretty much it. It. Alright. That's it for this episode. If you liked it, then make sure you subscribe and follow us on social media. You can also preorder my new book, The Longevity Leap at thelongevityleap.com.