Get up and go. You wanna get shit done. You wanna be productive. You're outgoing. You're confident. That's really where testosterone and dopamine, they really go hand in hand. Lucas, welcome back to the show. Sim, no. It's great to be back, man. Yeah. It's, been a while. Like, we had our first podcast maybe, like, a few years ago, and we've had, like, several of them, since that as well. And, like, in the first podcast we had, like, we talked a lot about the things that you were kind of renowned for back then were, like, testicle cooling and, those kind of things. So, yeah, I think we can do this podcast again. Like, we start off with some, like, basic principles of testosterone optimization, and then we move on with, some more interesting topics related to, like, dopamine and testosterone, which I think many people haven't, like, connected the dots there yet so we can, discuss that. So, yeah, I guess we can maybe start with, you know, how did you get into, like, trying to optimize testosterone levels, and how did you, yeah, like, kind of optimize your own testosterone? Yeah. So I was really fascinated by the effects that testosterone could have specifically on the brain. So I was really curious to know, like, what would happen if I went on an on a on a journey or an experimental phase to try and boost my testosterone levels as high as possible naturally. So I went out and I acquired, like, tons of different supplements. I started experimenting with different, you know, exercise protocols. I looked into things like icing the testes. Mhmm. I started dabbling with, like, traditional Chinese medicine, discovered some amazing herbs. And, that sort of journey led to a profound realization that most men, what I realized in today's society, can benefit from having high levels of testosterone. And the reason that I say that is because most men nowadays complain of the exact same things, which is low energy, you know, they can't recover from their workouts, they're not feeling like they can build muscle, they can't drop body fat. They just feel like they lack motivation, lack resilience, and testosterone and its associated metabolites like DHT and estrogen do help to to modulate that picture. So I think I think today, we're like, if we were to look at different interventions to, like, really skyrocket energy levels and boost general resilience, then I'd say testosterone has to be an important hormone to optimize. Right. So, like, in men, most people associate testosterone with, yeah, this, I guess, masculinity and, muscle mass and, like, not not aggression, but, like, assertiveness and kind of this, drive. Yeah. Exactly. Because, I mean, some of the effects are being documented nowadays. They're looking at how testosterone and DHT can actually, like, manipulate our our our mood states, because testosterone has a a positive effect on dopamine, and dopamine also has a positive effect on testosterone. So they sort of work hand in hand to both promote like that get up and go. You wanna get shit done. You wanna be productive. You're outgoing. You're confident. That's really where testosterone and dopamine, they really go hand in hand. Gotcha. So what is the kind of reason then that a lot of men nowadays have, lower levels of testosterone, especially, you know, comparing that to, like, decades back when the testosterone level was, higher on average? So if you look at the data, what they really emphasize is the fact that men are becoming obese, so carrying excess body weight and body fat. I definitely think body fat, obviously, it's increased. You can look at the data. I mean, you can look at what the reasons are for that. Could be polyunsaturated fatty acids, these seed oils. It could be some other factors like just crappy diets that are void of micronutrients. But I think I definitely think one pathway that gets neglected is the impact of these endocrine disrupting chemicals. These microplastics and these phthalates, these forever chemicals that actually, over time, you and I both know that they can build up in the body, and they can make their way into tissues and organs that we don't we don't want them there because they're basically gonna block the actions of different hormones, enzymes, different pathways, and just it's not the best, like, I would say, input for our body. It's something that we wanna try and expel and eliminate. Right. Yeah. You see a lot of new new research about these microplastics even found in, like, arteries of people and or, you know, unfortunate then, like, the testicles as well. They find that, they store microplastics in that testicles. I mean, so yeah. But, but, interesting guys also saw another researcher, I think, was last year that the average penis size has increased in today's world, compared to the past. So what what do you think, yeah, it's it's it's the average penis is longer than, like, a 100 years ago. A few inches, I think, or something. Interesting. No no pun intended. Interest. So with that with that factor there, I mean, was there a particular research paper that came out analyzing, and did they discuss potential mechanisms? Yeah. I, you know, I mean, it could be because of differences in measuring techniques or something. But I guess one of the main theories is that earlier puberty, like, children get into puberty earlier today because of these endocrine disrupting chemicals and microplastics, etcetera, which then, you know, enables them to kind of grow more. And now that could be having, like, a negative effect on their overall aging and lifespan because if you go into puberty earlier, then you're also gonna, you know, start aging faster, etcetera. So, yeah, not sure what the, like, you know, long term effects are gonna be. But, yeah, it was just like an interesting study that I found. And, it's kind of yeah. Like, people are generally unhealthier than now. They have lower testosterone, but, yeah, the penis size has increased, which is kind of a interesting, result. Well, in regards to that, I mean, there's been some research on the implications of, like, DHT and blocking DHT. You know, I've worked with a number of patients that talk about the side effects when they block DHT with, like, finasteride or some of these, DHT blockers. And if you look at some of the other research, they actually use topical, DHT cream back in the day to treat micropenis. So, like, as in to actually finalize the growth and development of the of the penile structure and shaft itself. So that's pretty that's pretty interesting research. Right. So DHT is the, like, most and most powerful androgen in the, in the human body. Yeah. So DHT is binding affinity to the androgen receptors specifically is about three to 10 times more potent than testosterone itself. So it's actually much more potent. And in in terms of its effects, it's more potent. And so, like, we look at consequences associated with blocking the production, which a lot of different herbs can do that. A lot of different drugs can do that. If you look at the drugs versus herbs comparison, I think some of the pharmaceutical drugs are a lot more potent at actually doing that. But, you know, if I was a developing guy again, luckily, I was I was luckily I was the opposite. When I was younger, I accidentally figured out that cordyceps actually increases DHT and so does creatine. And so when I was younger, I was taking a lot of cordyceps and creatine from the and which boost, boosts DHT. So here's a little hack for those those, teenagers, those listening in. Right. But, DHT is also, like, associated with hair loss and, like, prostate cancer. Right? Yeah. I mean, I if you I mean, I definitely think that it plays a big role. Prolactin is also another hormone that I think has an affinity towards that, accelerating hair loss and also inflammation in general, like high levels of CRP, zinc deficiency, iron deficiency, b twelve deficiency, you know, a lot of these macronutrient micronutrients play a role as well. Mhmm. Yeah. It's, yeah. Not not like a single cause, but, like, mechanistically, like, it's is is it, like, the the reason why the hair fall out? Or, like, what like, the reason why men get more hair loss than women? I think yeah. Mostly due to the fact that they're, like, androgen receptor profiles and their their different, locations for these receptors play a role. Mhmm. And then, obviously, men are producing more androgens in general, and they tend to, reduce hair follicle stimulation. Gotcha. Right. So, you know, guys, I like I like this one, like, quote. I have another quote, but, like, a tweet I guess made like that. You know, guys, I could really worry a lot about their testosterone levels, and they will do anything to increase their testosterone. They call the supplements and, avoid all the microplastics, but but not lift weights and not lose weight. So they'll do everything but the fundamentals, for for that. So, I guess, you know, a lot of the reason why, like, you already alluded to as well that men nowadays have lower testosterone is because of this unhealthier lifestyle and, kind of obesity that, is much higher than in the past. So maybe we can, like, start with some of the fundamentals of, lifestyle and, like, some of the, you know, main kind of low hanging fruits that everyone should look into and do before they, like, start more, like, advanced testosterone optimization like hacks? Yeah. Absolutely. I think most evidently, we look at different exercise profiles. So building muscle itself, so the sort of activities and exercises that build muscle is definitely not long distance cardio. So it's not doing going for a two hour bike ride or, you know, a two hour run. That's not gonna build muscle. That's gonna it will increase your VO two max. You know, it's gonna have a favor favorable effect on on those parameters. But I think if we look at the different exercise protocols to build muscle, that includes high intensity, short duration activities, I. E. Lifting weights, you know, doing doing calisthenics, push ups, chin ups, all these activities that involve large muscle groups where they recruit a large number of muscle fibers and and and, you know, requiring them to, perform explosive activity, that's where we're gonna see an increase in testosterone because testosterone actually is released following these sort of activities, particularly, funnily enough, particularly in very competitive environments. So if a guy is trying to app and if there's a if there's a woman watching as well Mhmm. Then the increase in testosterone goes up even more because they're trying to show off, you know, and trying trying to impress the mate sort of thing. Yeah. That's interesting. So, like, working out to that public gym is more inducive of testosterone than, the private gym. Yeah. Yeah. I'd say so. I'd say so. Right. And and, like, they do the compound lifts have, like, a better I've seen, like, research that the compound lifts, like the squat deadlift and bench, these multi joint movements, they tend to result in greater growth hormone and and testosterone release than, like, machines or, like, isolated exercises. Yeah. I definitely I definitely agree. If you look at the, those sort of activities, they're, you know, activating large muscle groups. It's more of a natural movement for the body. It's not not sort of isolated exercises. But I think if you stack that with, like, some form of hit training, whether that's like sprinting, the assault bike, the rowing machine, the bike, like the stationary bike, and doing, like, just maybe eight to 10 high intensity efforts, like where you're literally perform performing at about a 100%, 90 to a 100% of your max capacity, I think that's gonna in the long run, particularly if we blend that with different other types, I think in the long run, that's gonna have a beneficial effect on not only testosterone, but also dropping body fat, maintaining you know, improving insulin sensitivity, lowering, you know, various lowering blood pressure in the long run, improving blood flow, supporting heart health, all that sort of stuff. Gotcha. And, with reps and sets, like, is there any, like, difference? If there was a I mean, I I would love to be able to say there was a, you know, there's a golden number for, like, reps and sets. Like, this is the magical number. It really does differ depending upon, like, individual. So if someone like yourself who's, like, well adapted, you know, and you're you're highly acclimatized, you you've acclimated to training very high intensity, someone like yourself would probably require a bit more volume in order to get that stimulus because you've, you've built those adaptations. Whereas a beginner, someone who's never trained before, even if they did like five sets, like, five sets of eight to 12 reps on each exercise, I think that would be sufficient per workout. Gotcha. Yeah. Right. I I like generally like to do, like, lower amounts of reps usually with a compound lift. So I like maybe, like, five. Like, I started twelve years ago lifting with the five by five. And now, twelve years later, I'm I'm mostly doing that five by five still as well. Like, I I always find it, like, works really great, for me. Of course, sometimes I'll go, like, higher reps. Sometimes I'll do, like, three reps or something, but, kind of around that, range is is what I like. Yeah. So I think from an exercise standpoint, it's pretty evident. Like, there's definitely different modalities, different types of exercise. I guess the main takeaway here is if a guy is looking to boost testosterone, then stay away from long duration, like, marathon sort of, like, yeah. These are catabolic. They're so catabolic. Right. Yeah. And, like, it's I've seen online that, you know, the cortisol is what, is the bad guy here, that there's, like, some inverse relationship between cortisol and testosterone, like, is it true? Yep. So if we look at the relationship between cortisol and testosterone, the building blocks for cortisol and testosterone are actually similar. So if we look at the different pathway, what can happen is the, cholesterol gets converted into pregnenolone, and then downstream from pregnenolone, it can go down either towards cortisol or towards progester like, progesterone and that sort of adrenal protective steroid pathway. So if we look at what actually happens in the brain when when cortisol levels are high, it actually can block the upstream effects of something called GNRH, which is gonadotropin releasing hormone, and that can actually have an impact on, luteinizing hormone, which is what the brain tells the testes to make testosterone. So this is why when guys are under a massive amount of massive amounts of stress, you think about what they typically wanna do. They wanna, they'll reach for sugary foods. They'll reach for things that help to interestingly, if you look at the relationship between carbohydrate intake, how that can impact cortisol, what a lot of guys don't realize is that carbohydrate intake can actually dampen cortisol production. So it can actually have a this is why I'm not a big fan of long term ketogenic, like, long long you know, because over time, your body needs the carbohydrates to shut off the the stress response Mhmm. Lower cortisol. Yeah. And, like, that convert conversion, of, of, the progesterone to the hormones, also requires, like, thyroid thyroid hormones. So, like, there's a, like, balance between all the other hormones in the body and, you know, like, yeah, like, I personally also think that long term low carb intake is not the most optimal for thyroid and, the testosterone. And when you look at the studies, then you see that, yeah, like low carb diets and high protein, especially the high protein, low carb diets are seem to associate be associated with or result in lower testosterone in the in the randomized trials. And the the opposite, like a higher carb and more moderate or high protein diet that tends to result in higher. And it's also because of the sex hormone binding globulin. So that Yeah. SHBG that binds to free testosterone goes up in the, like, absence of carbohydrates or in very, like, severe calorie restriction, and it goes down when you eat carbohydrates or, like, high protein as well kind of like that. Yeah. We'll we'll definitely break that down for those listening in because, this is a if they can remember this pathway and the associations between the different hormones so, obviously, like you mentioned there, carbohydrates come in, they raise insulin, and by raising insulin, that suppresses SHBG. So that lowers SHBG, which raises free testosterone. So if guys that are going on I've seen you know, I've worked with guys that have been on carnivore or ketogenic diet, their total testos and even Paul Saladino spoke about it as well. He went on a, you know, strict low carb diet. Total testosterone was high, but then what happened was their free testosterone was actually low. And that's why those guys can benefit from compounds like boron, tonka ali, going on a higher carbohydrate diet, and then taking liver support supplements like to actually bring down, that SHBG. Right. Yeah. And maybe also, like, not being so low calories. So you can still be with, this suboptimal levels if you're, like, super super low calorie intake. So there is, like, a sweet spot, I guess, then for the body fat, like, being, you know, too low, too skinny can lower testosterone. And if you're, like, obese, then that can also lower testosterone. Yeah. There's definitely there's definitely a sweet spot. I think if you get super lean, like, really, really shredded, like one of my mates, he just got down to, like, 9% body fat. Like, he looks amazing. Physically, he looks incredible. If you saw him on, like, on stage, you'd think that he's like a competitive bodybuilder, like or or physique athlete. But his testosterone levels are actually, like, 350. So, like, you can't necessarily tell just by looking at a guy's physique. Like, it's not necessarily although you can tell by looking at a very obese male, in particular, if you see a guy that's, like, very obese, I can almost guarantee he has low testosterone. Right. So, like, is there any percentage, like, 15% and above is bad, or 10% and below is bad? I'd say, yeah, between 10 to 15% is pretty good for most guys. Right. Gotcha. Right. So, yeah, like, anything else about diet, at least any, like, our dietary principles. One, I guess, myth as well I've seen online is that to boost testosterone, you need to eat cholesterol, which, wouldn't work because your the blood cholesterol or dietary cholesterol intake doesn't actually produce the, like hormones themselves. Like your body would make all the cholesterol that it needs to make the hormones. And you need you don't need to, like, eat more cholesterol to increase testosterone, which doesn't mean that eating foods that have cholesterol wouldn't support your testosterone for other reasons, but the cholesterol itself isn't the key link there. That's a great a great point. Well, let's, well, let's look at the foods that are high in cholesterol, first of all. So it's like eggs, organ meats, like eggs, chicken hearts, liver, kidney, a lot of these organ brain, like these organ meats, they're gonna they will assist with testosterone production, not necessarily because of the cholesterol content, but it's actually because of the the micronutrient values Mhmm. And also the, the fat soluble vitamin content. So it's like eggs are rich in micronutrients as well. Chicken hearts are really high in zinc and coenzyme q ten. And some of these other organ meats also probably have high amounts of like taurine, possibly, like, glycine, these other amino acids that actually, like, trick people into thinking, oh, these high cholesterol foods are the are the reason why I'm my testosterone's gone up. But, actually, it's because a lot of these, nutrients are super bioavailable. So that the fact the sheer fact that they're high in these nutrients is what enables the, the higher testosterone. Mhmm. Yeah. Like, you know, these foods are good for testosterone production, but it's not the cholesterol that is the reason there is the point. And I've seen that same with, like, the brain. So your brain has a lot of cholesterol, but, you know, cholesterol from your blood doesn't cross the blood brain barrier. So there's no way that the cholesterol that you eat would get into the brain to make cholesterol there. Your brain makes the cholesterol itself, and it actually makes it with insulin to, produce the cholesterol inside the brain and support, like, the functions there. So, yeah, it's kind of it's very, like, you know, unfortunate that there is, like, this, you know, same words used to describe, like, different things. One, like, key nutrient or, like, hormone is vitamin d. So, yeah, what can you tell us about the relationship between vitamin d and testosterone? Yep. So vitamin d is definitely a super important hormone. I call it a hormone because it's a a secchi steroid. It's, you know, it's a it's not actually a vitamin. So vitamin d is really crucial because if we look at the data, it's pretty obvious that those that have high levels of vitamin d, so on the upper end of the reference range, tend to have high levels of testosterone as well. So if you look at the research there, that's mostly due to the fact that vitamin d can influence so many different, enzymes and and also affect something called star enzyme expression, so steroidogenesis acute regulatory protein. Vitamin d has a positive effect on that pathway, which can help with that conversion of cholesterol into pre into pregnenolone. So that that pathway there is assisted with, high levels of vitamin d. And in addition to that, what a lot of people don't know about these fat soluble vitamins, vitamins a, d, e, k two, is that a lot of them actually inhibit aromatase. So in high dosages, these these fat soluble vitamins in particular actually can block the aromatase enzyme, which is the enzyme that converts testosterone into estrogen, which is pretty, pretty interesting. Mhmm. Wow. I I didn't know that. And also, like, extra body fat is increasing aromatase, so lowers your testosterone through that mechanism. Yeah. And so if you look at, like, the different strategies to to boost vitamin d, I mean, there's what I would say is there's, like, two actually, three main strategies. The first one is sunlight exposure, like going outside in the sun, exposing your body to the sun to a point where you're not getting sunburn. And number two would be actually using, like, a vitamin d lamp or some sort of vitamin d device where it actually a a a light device that actually emits you a a UVB, radiation. Mhmm. And then third would be supplementation. So you can't get vitamin d in high enough amounts from food. It needs to be from one of those three foot forms. So whether you go outside, use a vitamin d lamp, or you supplement with vitamin d with k two and magnesium, they they're your go to ways to to boost vitamin d. Gotcha. Yeah. Do you know anything about the red light lamps? Do they have any effect on testosterone? So what's interesting about those is some of the preliminary data was looking at how UV radiation to the chest area of men can actually increase testosterone related precursor hormones. So specifically affecting, like, androstenedione and these, like, precursor hormones, which is a positive thing, which is a beneficial thing. Now if we look at red light specifically on the testes, like, whether or not, you know, shining a red light up against testes actually works, There is some evidence to suggest that the red light exposure can actually facilitate greater ATP production in in the in the leydig cells, which makes them work more efficiently and makes them, like, hyperexcited so that they can actually do their thing more effectively, you know, be more efficient. So I would say if a guy's looking to boost testosterone, then maybe, you know, incorporating maybe, like, two to three minutes a day of red light therapy in that area can be beneficial. A few years ago, there there was also the trend that, you know, shining the sunlight on the testicles and, the red light on the testicles as well to, like, directly help with testosterone production there. Is there, like, any do you think any truth to that? Yeah. I definitely think, like, in small amounts, I think those, you know, interventions can help a little bit. I've looked at guys' blood work. I've looked at heaps of different blood test results, and I've seen guys that do incorporate that versus those that don't. And the ones that do incorporate it, it does help a little bit, but nowhere near as much as getting the foundational things in place. Nowhere near as much as, like, dialing in diet, sleep, exercise. Like, these are gonna move the needle a lot more. Yes. Yeah. Like you mentioned, sleep. We haven't talked yet about it. So sleep restriction, you know, would raise cortisol, also lower testosterone. And, yeah, like, how much sleep do you think is, like, optimal? Definitely, I think looking at the sleep parameters, I mean, we're we really wanna be aiming for at least seven to nine hours of uninterrupted high quality sleep, specifically to help enable the release of these, you know, anabolic hormones, growth hormone, testosterone, just a recovery phase. It's very evident now that those that don't sleep enough can wake up prediabetic in a sense where their Mhmm. Their response to sugar is no longer as good as a normal person. And that by itself, there's research indicating that if you have elevated blood sugar levels all the time, like, chronically, that will that will, by itself, lower testosterone levels as well. So guys need a if anyone any guys listening to this and thinks that they're going through those blood sugar roller coasters throughout the day, it's actually having a deleterious effect and negative effect on testosterone as well. So from a sleep perspective, man, there are so many powerful and effective interventions to help help with sleep. I mean, definitely looking at the room your sleeping environment by itself. The room should be, pitch black dark, so it needs to be fully dark. Ideally, if you want, you can wear a you can wear an eye mask just to, you know, block out the any any sort of peripheral light, if there is any peripheral light. Wearing blue light blocker glasses, you and I have been doing this for, like, five plus, probably longer than that, six years, even longer. You know, integrating some of these sleep supportive, foods. So, I mean, if you look at some foods that have been shown to raise melatonin levels, pistachios, kiwi fruit, pineapple, these foods have a beneficial effect on increasing melatonin levels. So I think from a sleep perspective, if a guy is sleeping, like, six hours per night every single night during the week, then he is very likely to have a decrease in testosterone as a result of those behaviors. Yeah. Gotcha. I wanna take a quick break to let you know that you can now get my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. It contains 24 chapters ranging from the biology of aging to all the major chronic diseases, such as heart disease, kidney disease, neurodegeneration, and I also cover over 70 clinically relevant biomarkers for chronic diseases and their optimal ranges. You can get the book from the link in the description. Alright. So I think that's, like, a good overview of the, like, the fundamentals that, everyone should, like, first focus on and get those right. And, yeah, one interesting topic that I wanna talk about is, like, the relationship between dopamine and the testosterone. So there is, like, some effects there. So can you explain that? Yep. So this is a really important pathway to understand as a guy. If he's if he's looking to achieve peak productivity, peak energy, feel highly resilient, just feeling super motivated, then no doubt dopamine and testosterone are equally as important as each other. Now it's sort of like a chicken or chicken and the egg situation, which one came first. I personally think that we should start upstream to optimize dopamine. So, specifically, what we need to understand here is that dopamine by itself, the neurotransmitter, can actually suppress a hormone called prolactin. So dopamine lowers prolactin. Mhmm. So in cases where individuals have high prolactin on a blood test, this may be because their dopamine levels are not high enough, and they're not binding to that specific dopamine d two receptor. So then I've sort of just, you know, mentioned this prolactin hormone. What's so important about prolactin? Well, prolactin can actually put the hand brakes on testosterone production. So if guy if a guy has a, you know, high prolactin on a blood test, that can actually lead to a suppression of testosterone production. And so we're looking at this interplay between dopamine and testosterone. If we look at the different interventions to to boost dopamine, a lot of those interventions, such as cold therapy, you know, taking a nice bar, things like that, supplementing with l tyrosine or some other dopamine agents, they can actually suppress prolactin and by virtue actually increase testosterone. So I think it's in a really important pathway to understand as a guy. And so that's why I've just been really passionate about uncovering novel ingredients to specifically boost, dopamine. Gotcha. Yeah. Usually, people associate, like, dopamine with this addiction and, like, I guess, neuroticism or some types of, like, bad behaviors. Like, people are addicted to, like, whatever food or porn or whatever thing, and they blame, like, dopamine for that. But in a lot of cases, it might be actually, like, low dopamine, which then makes them seek out those behaviors to get that hit. So their baseline dopamine is low, which then, like, oh, I need to kind of bring myself up with these kind of stimulations that, entertain me. Oh, absolutely. And if you look at, like, the commonly used, compounds that are used to, like, boost dopamine, I mean, caffeine, it has to be on the list because it's ubiquitous. Like, it's one of the most widely used drugs in the world. Nicotine is another one. Like, nicotine, yes, of course. If you type in nicotine dopamine PubMed, tons of articles will come up. If you type in l tyrosine or l phenylalanine, dopamine, PubMed, heaps of articles will come up. So there's definitely, you know, different interventions to boost dopamine. And I think when we look at this particular pathway, I like to look at, like, different ancient herbal extracts that have been designed historically to boost dopamine. And so, like, if you look at the commonly used ones, I mean, one that I was really profoundly interested in was catwaba, which is a particular herbal extract from Brazil that I believe is gonna be extremely popular in the next, like, six to twelve months as a herbal way to to boost and modulate dopamine levels. Interesting. Tyrosine as well, I think is, like, one of the more generic dopamine, you know, acids people like to use. Yeah. And you've got the variations of tyrosines. You've got the n acetyl l tyrosine. That's a different version. Some people find that a little bit more, like, speedy. And if you if you supplement with l tyrosine, what's gonna happen is it'll if you have sufficient amounts of iron and vitamin c and copper, you will get that conversion into dopamine, but you'll also get the downstream conversion into norepinephrine or, noradrenaline, which is a different a different neurotransmitter that can affect, like, mood, motivation, arousal, makes people feel, like, a bit more highly strung, but it also will supercharge your workouts because need high levels of norepinephrine to actually get going and actually do things. Yeah. Right. I think it's this will be, like, a interesting or good time to ask it. Like, a lot of questions I get online is also, like, what about, like, semen retention and NoFap and those things? Like, does it reset my dopamine receptors, and does it increase my testosterone or something? Like, every once in a while, someone, like, always asks. So, like and it's also, like, very popular online to, have, like, videos about NoFap and those kind of things. So, yeah, what what is the science, or is there any science behind that? Yeah. So looking at semen retention or NoFap, if you have a little bit data, there is one particular study that identified that on day seven I think you've maybe done a video about this as well. On day seven of abstinence or abstaining from ejaculation, there is a pretty dramatic increase in testosterone levels. And from what I've heard from other guys who have spoken to, they do feel pretty good on day seven, day eight of no ejaculation, generally speaking. So they feel a little bit more motivated, bit more energetic, bit more, like, I guess, like, more, engaged with life and more excited by life. And then I speak to other guys who say that they just cannot, you know, go beyond, like, three or four days without, you know, ejaculation because it makes them feel just irritable and, just a bit off. But if you look at the data, I mean, what's interesting is that they looked at prostate cancer risk. Have you seen the study where they looked at ejaculation frequency and prostate cancer risk? I haven't seen that. Yeah. They say that, the it's about three to five times per week actually decreases prostate cancer risk, which I thought was, you know, I thought that was pretty, like, standard for most guys. Like, usually, most guys sit in that range, typically. So that was pretty interesting research. Right. Yeah. That's that kinda makes sense that, there's, like, at the point of diminishing returns at some point that will have that effect. But having sex then would generally increase testosterone or and dopamine. Yeah. So, basically, what happens is masturbation versus actual intercourse, there's a massive difference in quality of life, generally speaking, like mood. You get more of an oxytocin boost from, you know, into, like, having sex prop like, versus masturbation. So generally speaking, if you look at, like, the anti stress effects, you're gonna get a much better anti stress effect from actual intercourse versus, you know, masturbation. Mhmm. Yeah. Makes sense. So, yeah, are there any, like, I guess, like, we there's also the popular topic of, the kind of testosterone boosters, Tongkat Ali and Ashwagandha and those kind of things. You're also, like, known for dissing, ashwagandha and, not liking it. So, yeah, we can talk about, like, some of the testosterone boosters. And, yeah, also congratulations on your own, like, launch of the supplement company with, this new compound for the testosterone booster that, like, I haven't even heard of before. So, yeah, we can talk about all of those. Yeah. Appreciate that. Well, when we look at the different herbs, I mean, over the years, I've spoken quite extensively about different supplements and interventions to help with lowering cortisol, helping with, you know, serotonin, helping with sleep. We've all spoke with I think a lot of your audience has probably heard about Tonka Ali. A lot of your audience has probably heard about Cistanche. Maybe they've heard about Fidosia or Agrestis. You know, doctor Andrew Hoopman spoken favorably about both of those herbs, and for good reason. Because Tongkat Ali in the at least in many different human clinical trials does have a favorable effect on testosterone. For Dozier Agrestis lacks human clinical trials, but in terms of what people have noticed on on their blood work, it actually does increase free testosterone. And so and I've spoken negatively about ashwagandha. The reason for that is because ashwagandha can have a, you know, really nasty side effect that is now infiltrating the entire Internet. Like, it seems like every second influencer is talking about the the anhedonia and the emotional blunting that comes with ashwagandha usage, which for a number of guys, the side effect is just too disruptive for them to continue supplementing, so they don't even wanna use it anymore. So I'm really proud of the fact that I've raised awareness on that particular topic. But what I really It does. It raises testosterone, right, and lower cortisol. But it but it will raise testosterone. Yes. It does do that on paper. So it's like, do you look at what something says in theory on paper versus but then how does it translate to to actual practice? Right? So it's like, on paper, it looks great. Like, most guys will read up the studies and be like, I have to take this herb. Like, this sounds amazing. They start taking it. They'll do their blood work. Their testosterone's gone up. Their cortisol's gone down. Their thyroid's gone up. Their blood sugar's gone down. But they feel anhedonic, and they feel flat and apathetic. Right. So it just doesn't really tick that box. So what I decided to do was look into and this is something I've been researching for years. Like, I have a an Excel spreadsheet with, like, over 2,500 different botanical extracts, ingredients, amino acids, peptides, all that sort of stuff that I'll be building over the years. And I thought I thought about, like, what can I do to make an impact in the supplement space, particularly in this, like, biohacking web bubble that we're in? And I'm like, the world needs to know about this particular herb called catawaba. And that's why we started with the I mean, my my brand name is Inbefore, I n b four, Inbefore. And so we start we decided to start our first supplement as a katwaba extract. So when most people hear about it, they're like, what the heck is this? Like, where's it from? Like, what what is it? Like, what is even what's so special about it? Why would Lucas come out with a herb that no one's heard about? The reason for that is because if you go to South America, you know, the Amazon Rainforests, like, if you talk if you ask shamans and botanical experts about Katowaba, almost all of them will say, like, one of three things. Number one, you want more energy, which is like yerba mate and cacao and maca powder. Mhmm. Number two is, are you looking for an aphrodisiac? So something that increases sex drive, the opposite of what, ashwagandha could do for some for some guys. And number three is, you wanna support healthy mood. Like, you wanna actually get feel like you're in a good mood. What's amazing about catawaba is that it's one of the only known herbs that I personally know of that can specifically act as a dopamine reuptake inhibitor. So it's not like an SSRI. It's a dough it's on the others It works in a different way. The alkaloids that are found in catwaba, they they're called catwaba beans, actually possess dopamine reuptake inhibitory effects. So when people supplement with catwaba, and hopefully, they're they they need to know this critical fact is that when we're looking at catwaaba extracts, it's pretty difficult to find one that actually is catwaaba. So we spent over nine months testing different types of cassava extracts from different suppliers, and we sent it off to get a third party analyzed at a, botanical, specialty place called alchemist.com. A lot of our sample a lot of our samples failed. Like, they didn't actually pass the assessment. They were actually fake. And then eventually, we found one supplier that actually passed, and we're like, this is the real deal. Like, we finally found our cat's guava. So this particular herb is just it's remarkable in terms of its, its effects. Interesting. Yeah. A lot of, supplements tend to have, yeah, not either not enough of the ingredient or, like, not at all. So, yeah, it's good to have it, like, third party tested and to see that it actually has that amount. But, yeah, I haven't heard about this, compound before. Like, it's so it's like a herb that you Yeah. Find in in nature? Yeah. So if you look at, so if you type in catwaba bark, so it's actually a bark. It's a bark extract. Okay. So, basically, it's a herbal extract that I I personally would call it an adaptogen. So I would call it similar to, like, ginseng, similar to rhodiola, similar to, like, Shilajit. Like, most most guys that I know absolutely love Shilajit. But if they if they love Shilajit, then there's a pretty good chance that they're gonna love this Catawaba. And so we've we've trademarked the name Catuaba Pure, so it's c a t u a Pure, because we wanted to stand out. We wanna show people that, like, now we have selected the real deal. Like, this is actually we've put in the effort to, like, make it modernize this ancient herb. Gotcha. Right. How, like, big of an effect would you think, these kind of, you know, any of these testosterone supplements, including the, would have on, increasing testosterone? And, obviously, it would be different for different people, like, I guess, people who have lower levels of baseline to begin with, and they're, like, with an unhealthier lifestyle, etcetera, would those people see more effects compared to those who already have, like, everything optimized, or is it vice versa? Yeah. So I'd say for those that are, like, really not optimized, so, for example, those that are, like, not super healthy, they're probably gonna notice catawaba a lot more than different, different herbs because what's unique about cassava is that, like, it's one of those herbs that you can actually subjectively feel. Like, it's not really, like, just hovering around in the background. You you don't you can't remember if you took it or not. Like, it's one of those herbs that, like just like coffee, you can feel it. Like, it's a it is a it is a CNS stimulant, in a sense. Like, it it actually is wakefulness promoting its its arousal invigorating in terms of that in that in that tense. But if you looked at the data, like, if you had to do, like, a head to head comparison between, like, Kathwaba versus, like, Tonkad Ali versus Cistanche, I I would say there's not enough evidence to suggest that Kathwaba can outperform the other version the other herbs, but I'm excited to see in the next, like, three to five years from now, like, hopefully, hopefully, my brand gets to the point where we can actually run clinical trials and test whether or not Catawba lowers prolactin, whether or not it lowers cortisol, that will be fun. Mhmm. Yeah. That would be awesome. But with some of these adaptogens and, herbs, is it better to, like, cycle them or take them continuously? Yeah. So what what I found really unique about Catawba is that, its effects seem to actually build up over time. So some people have reported that Catawba has, reversed tolerance, which means that the more you use it, the stronger the effects. So I tested this out on a bunch of, like, different clients, and I said to them, I'm like, take this for, like, two weeks straight, and then I want you to stop taking it completely after two weeks. Just stop abruptly. And funnily enough, there wasn't really a, like, a crash. There wasn't really a comedown. The effects, like, just gradually slowly faded away, and and they gradually just went back to baseline. So it didn't result in, like, a an a like, an amphetamine like effect where there was a big spike and then a huge crash. And I think this is because some of the alkaloids, these catwa beans that are found in in catwaaba, I think they have modulatory effects on the dopamine receptors. So I think they actually might modulate the dopamine receptors at the same time whilst increasing dopamine. So, that's a pretty interesting effect. But like I say, with pretty much all supplements, and I think you're pretty similar, is that, yes, they should be cycled. And if you wanna use them properly, yes, you need to take breaks. Like, six weeks on, two weeks off is a good protocol, or four weeks on, one week off, that can work well as well. Mhmm. For sure. Yeah. With, like, at least, like, you know, TRT or, like, injectable testosterone, it's like it increases your testosterone and then it shuts down shuts down your natural testosterone production. I would imagine that with, these testosterone supplements, they don't raise testosterone that much to have that effect. So there's, like, no worry about, that. Yeah. Yeah. It's unlikely because they're not that potent. But if you look at, like, for example, one herb that's, like, heavily used to boost dopamine is mucuna pruriens. Now mucuna does contain like, if we had to do a head to head comparison between, like, mucuna versus cat's waba, I think catwaba can get you there to a similar point as mucuna, but not as aggressively, if you know what I mean. Like, mucuna is like it contains l dopa, which is literally like the precursor to dopamine. So it's like shortcutting your circuitry system. L dopa in a sense is actually like it's really potent, and it can have side effects. Whereas, like, if you look at Catawba, it doesn't contain l dopa. It contains, like, chlorogenic acid. It contains epicatechin. It even contains proanthocyanidins, which are found in, like, pine bark. Like, it has these beneficial compounds that also seem to help with vasodilation as well. Yes. So, like, the polyphenolic compounds that people get from food. Interesting. Have have you, like you know, you've used it yourself. Have you, like, measured any any blood work to see any difference? That's the one thing that I haven't really because I'm always experimenting and trying so many different things. I would love to just do by itself in isolation for, like, eight weeks straight and see whether or not it actually changes, like, prolactin, whether or not it actually has an effect on estrogen or testosterone. But what I will be doing is for my, like, clients that I work with, I'll I'll get them to do blood work before and after, and I'll see what impact it's had. It's like, does the impact on the blood work correlate with how they feel? Because, obviously, like, we don't have the technology. We don't have that advanced technology to be able to measure dopamine in the brain. You can do, like, the urinary metabolites. You've seen the the, like, the Dutch test. It can give you, like, metabolites and things like that. And there's some other, like, neurotransmitter test, but I think it's difficult to to rely upon those because neurotransmitters are, like, region specific. Like, what part of the brain are they high? Like, that's what matters. Gotcha. Interesting. Yeah. Will be interesting to see what are the results are gonna be. I wanna, yeah, like, talk a little bit more about, the blood work of testosterone as well. But, yeah, like, before we go there, like, is there any anything you wanna mention more about the supplement? I'd say I'd say for those that are, like, looking for a compound that they can use for, like, general day to day energy, you've got things like Shilajit, NMN, Creatine. Like, they're all help they're all beneficial. We all use a lot of people use them because they work. If you're looking for something that you can actually subjectively feel and, like, notice it from a psycho psychological mental perspective, then I'd say, yeah, Pathway Pure, it's, it is a it is a it is a standout herb that you can, you know, subjectively really notice. Alright. Sounds good. So, yeah, blood work. We mentioned, testosterone, SSB g, prolactin, and, free testosterone. So I guess, we can, you know, maybe start with, with the difference between testosterone and free testosterone. Because like you said, you might have high testosterone, but if you have low free testosterone, then, you know, that's that's the active form. That's the one that actually matters or matters more. So, yeah, like, can you, like, explain some of the relationship there? Yeah. Definitely. So looking at the the difference between free testosterone and and total testosterone is really essential when it comes to analyzing their effects on the body. So, basically, what happens is when you go to your doctor, most times, they'll assess total testosterone, and sometimes they'll they'll neglect free testosterone. But free testosterone is is the portion of testosterone that's actually, like, biologically active. So what happens is there's three there's, like, another hormone that heavily affects this, which is, sex hormone binding globulin or SHBG. Now about 65 to 75% of testosterone is bound to SHBG, And then about 25 to 35% is loosely found in the albumin, so that's considered the bioavailable portion. And then about 2% circulates unbound, and it's immediately available to target tissues. So if we're looking at blood work, what you wanna see is that your free testosterone is also high like your total testosterone. So you wanna have both high free testosterone and also high total testosterone and moderate moderate to normal SHBG. You don't want SHBG to be super high. You don't want it above the reference range, and you also don't wanna see SHBG in the toilet super low because having very low SHBG can lead to problems as well. Right. Yeah. Like the like we mentioned, like, a lot of the low carb or low calorie intake with extreme weight loss can, increase the SHBG and lower the testosterone there. The rest of the testosterone, I think, is bound to, like, albumin, so that's another, like, biomarker that you can also measure. And, with prolactin, is it something that you measure yourself as well, or, is it something you don't don't measure? Prolactin is a prolactin is a hormone that's oftentimes, like, overlooked. I'll I'll like to see prolactin on the lower end of the reference range. Typically, the guys that have, like, good energy, good vitality, they feel like they can get things done. They're they're not complaining about low mood. They're the guys that have low prolactin. The guys that feel like they've got brain fog or they feel, like, apathetic, they're just, like, really struggling to to get through the day. They really lack motivation. Generally speaking, they're the ones that have high prolactin. And interestingly, the prolactin can also shut down, sex drive and libido as well. So that's also one of the reasons why most guys wanna keep their prolactin levels in control. What what raises prolactin? So interestingly, if you look at the literature, serotonin so serotonin actually increases prolactin. Dopamine does the opposite. If you look at thyroid hormones, so insufficient thyroid hormones can actually raise prolactin. Stress can raise prolactin. Highly estrogenic foods, I feel like like soy like soy based foods, they could probably have a an increasing effect on prolactin. There is research on using a sauna so that that you using a sauna might actually raise prolactin levels post sauna. So there there's definitely some different, you know, reasons for and even zinc deficiency that can raise prolactin or insufficient vitamin b six as well. Right. I think, like, I've I've seen that ejaculation also raises prolactin. Right? Yeah. That, the the the testosterone rises while you're having sex, but after you ejaculate, then, productin rises, which can lower the testosterone. If a guy specifically ejaculates in in in the woman, like, that that leads to a higher prolactin spike as well. So Interesting. That's a little hack. Interesting. Yeah. So what what what would be some some numbers as well for people to kind of think about, like, you hear that, okay, low testosterone is bad, etcetera, may have lower testosterone. What is, like, the average today for testosterone? Like, you know, it doesn't have to be specific number, but kind of a not like, a range. And then also what is, like, low, you know, considered to be more clinically low and and then what's considered to be more optimal. So if you look at the reference range for testosterone, what's happened over time is that they've actually reduced the reference range. So they've actually narrowed it down because the global average is decreasing so dramatically. And so if you look at the different reference ranges, ideally, what I like to see most guys between the age of, like, 20 to, like, 40 years of age. I wanna see them in the upper end of the reference range. So, typically, that's between around seven hundred nanograms per deciliter all the way up to around 1,200. So 1,200 nanograms per deciliter of total testosterone. I would classify anything less than, like, 400. That's what I personally would classify as low. Most doctors will say to me, like, Lucas, you can't you can't say that because that's not low. But to be honest, like, I'm looking at optimizing male health across the globe. If we wanna make men feel like men and have great levels of vitality, muscle growth, and all that, then I think testosterone levels shouldn't be less than that. Otherwise, you're just gonna suffer, in the long run. Right. Yeah. That's interesting. I've seen a few video YouTube videos or, like, I guess, like, a few more influencer types that you know, Jeff Nippert, he's, like, this power lifter and pretty strong and muscular, but I saw his testosterone was something like four eighty or something, which is pretty low. It's lower than you would expect, but he he doesn't seem like he has, like, problems building muscle or having a successful business, etcetera. So there's probably some individual differences there. And, like, Sean Baker, I think he's worth, like, something 550 as well. So they're not, like, massive high numbers, but they're generally healthy. That's a good point. What I would what I would be curious to know is what would happen if Jeff Nippard had double the levels of testosterone that he had now? Like, would he look would he look and feel even better? Would he be more like, the question remains. Like, would his mood be slightly better? Would his workouts be that little bit better? Sean Baker, he he's a lot older. Obviously, he's, like Mhmm. Late. Right. Like Yeah. I guess he his disaster might be higher if he introduced carbohydrates probably. He would probably add 200 to his number easily by adding some carbs or, you know, even, like, honey or something. Yep. Yep. Yep. I definitely think the carbohydrate source is like like you said, honey, like organic yogurt, like maybe milk, you know, berries, some of these fruits. So I think that I don't think there's any issues with those. Yeah. And it also, like, fluctuates quite easily. Like, I've seen I I, you know, traveled to, like, my retreat in India, so, kind of a jet lag and a bit, sleep loss. And, there, my testosterone was something like five eighty, which is, like, a bit lower. And then I came back here, you know, a few weeks later, I measured it. It was like 800. So it kind of fluctuates quite a lot based on if you, like, sleep enough or if you're, like, stressed out or something like that. So I think, yeah, you kind of need to if you do measure your disaster and you need to, like, control for some of the, like, environmental factors that, okay, don't do it if you're, like, super sleep loss, sleep deprived, or if you're, like, particularly stressed out. That's a good point. I think, if you look at the like, definitely circadian rhythm dysfunction, that's gonna have a, you know, detrimental effect on testosterone. Like, you saw the fact that when you're traveling a lot. I even think, man, like, to be honest, like, the air quality in the in the actual plane itself, like, the the chemicals that come out of the the vents and things like that, just I'm sure that would be problematic as well. Like, in some way, I think that just can't be good. Right. Yeah. Who knows? Yeah. Air airplane is not, yeah, like, the best place to be, but, you know, you gotta do it. I know. Otherwise, what are we gonna do? Just, like, touch a space shuttle. Yeah. Well, yeah, it was it's been great talking with you, and, yeah, congrats again on the the launch of the supplement. Looking forward to see what the results are. And, yeah, before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and, we can check out, Katwaba? Yeah. Awesome. Awesome. Thanks for the, for the podcast. Always always fun to chat, Sim. So if anyone is interested in learning more about the Katwaba, they can check it out in before inb4sops.com. So we can leave that linked in the in the podcast show notes. Otherwise, they can also check me out on, on Instagram as well. Sounds good. We'll put the links in the show notes. And, yeah, my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you had a better tuner? Gee, I would say learning how to, like, integrate and appreciate the fact that, like, social connection can really have a dramatic effect on general, like, happiness and mood. I used to think that I could just be an absolute workhorse and, like, not see anyone and just go to the gym, you know, like, work my ass off and just do my own thing. But now true happiness for me, like, I wish I wish I knew this earlier was is when I'm surrounded by good people and good friends. So yeah. Mhmm. Right. Absolutely. Yeah. It probably has effects on testosterone as well, like being around women. Yeah. Yep. Definitely. Well, yeah, it was great talking with you, and, yeah, I'll see you around. Thanks, Tim. Good to chat. Yeah. Thank you. I'll see you around. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Sim. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.