So longevity is a very popular topic, one of my favorite topics as well, but as I'm going to unravel in my speech, there's a few shortcomings in the way we think about longevity. And the purpose of my speech is to help you to identify this flaw and overcome it. But I'm gonna start with one of the biggest miracles of modern medicine, which is the gradual increase in average human life expectancy over the past few centuries. So as you can see from this graph, back in the eighteenth century, the average human life expectancy was around 40 years of age, whereas nowadays it's above 70. Of course, in the past, this number was brought down severely by the high rate of infant mortality and various infectious diseases. But you can still see that over the past few decades even, the average, five to six pregnancy has increased and we are generally living longer across the entire world no matter where you're living from. There's just, you know, some differences between different regions. The issue is that it's been, identified that there's a massive gap between our current life expectancy and our current maximum human lifespan and the health adjusted life expectancy. So this particular study, or in back in 2020, the global average life expectancy was 73.2. But what has been found is that the health adjusted life expectancy, which refers to the length of your life disease free, was only 64. So there's a nine point two year gap between your health span and your lifespan, which is actually around 12% of your maximum lifespan. So 12% of your life, people generally spend in some sort of a disease state, whether that be diabetes, high blood pressure, disabilities, other kinds of chronic morbidities. So as you can see, there is a huge gap of improvement. And this is what I call the longevity leap, taking a leap to bridge the gap between healthspan and lifespan so that we could stay healthier for longer, and we would live longer without diseases. And it is also possible that by doing this, by shortening the gap between your healthspan and lifespan, by avoiding the chronic diseases, you will also see an increase in the average lifespan, at least a few years. So step number one to achieve this is to delay chronic diseases. What are the top 10 causes of death and causes of morbidity worldwide? They are these noncommunicable diseases, modern diseases as they're also called, such as ischemic heart disease, stroke, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and Alzheimer's and diabetes, kidney disease, those are very modern diseases, or they're very common in developed countries. Obviously, in developing countries, they have slightly different burden of diseases mostly related to infectious diseases. But regardless, the goal to extend your health span is to make sure that you don't get these kinds of chronic diseases for at least as long as possible. And they find that the age at which you get one of these chronic diseases greatly determines your life expectancy as well. So in this 2023 study, they found that getting diagnosed with a chronic disease such as diabetes at the age of 30 or 40 shortened your life expectancy by up to ten to fourteen years, even sixteen years. Whereas if you got diabetes first time diagnosed with diabetes first time, in your seventies, you only lost three to five years from your life. So as you can see, if you get one of these chronic diseases early in your life, then you're shortening your life expectancy significantly more than getting those same diseases later in your life. Hence, the idea of, you know, wanting to delay chronic diseases as much as possible. Centenarians, people who live over a 100, do this same thing, they delay chronic diseases. And it's not that centenarians don't get heart disease, that they don't get diabetes or Alzheimer's, they just get those diseases ten to twenty years later than the average person does. And research has found three main morbidity profiles of centenarians. Survivors are the kind of people who get a particular chronic disease before the age of 80 and still survive until the age of 100. Delayers are the type of people who delay these chronic diseases until the age of 80 and then distill live to 100. And then there's escapers who don't get any of these chronic diseases up until the age of 100. And eighty seven percent of centenarian men and eighty three percent of centenarian women belong to either the delayer or the escaper group. So there is some survivors among centenarians, some centenarians who have these chronic diseases for decades, but they're a small minority. So there's a huge importance in making sure that you don't pretty much get diagnosed with these chronic diseases early in life, and you want to delay them as much as possible and potentially even escape them. That's the optimal scenario. A good case study to exemplify this is the longest living man in history, Jerome Kimura. He lived to 116, and he lived his all his life pretty much disease free. He didn't have any correct diseases, but he did get diagnosed with kidney disease when he was 113 years of age. And the last six months of his life, he experienced three heart failures. So he got hospitalized for heart failure three times in the last six months of his life, which is actually, you know, the optimal way to you want to die. You don't wanna get these chronic diseases and carry them for decades. You wanna have them in a very short time period within the last months of of your death. So he's actually the one of the best examples of this longevity leap, of living disease free as long as possible, and then having like a very short and rapid death. It's, you know, it's a bit morbid, but it's actually the best way to kind of die. We also have actually good data from Jerome's blood work. So this study had tracked his biomarkers from 2008 to 2,012, so three times. And his blood markers are actually pretty decent. Like, they're very cute for someone his age. You can see his cholesterol is in the seventies, triglycerides in the seventies, blood sugar is very low as well, so he had the biomarkers of someone who was decades younger than him. The only, the only shortcoming of his blood work was the kidney function, that his histadiency was elevated, his abdomen was low, which was indicative of his kidney disease that he got late in his life. Centenarians and their offspring also show a younger biological age measured by different kinds of epigenetic clocks. So the centenarians, they don't get these diseases early like the average person does because they have certain genetics that favor their longevity, and those genetics protect them against the chronic diseases that the average person gets early in life. You know, the centenarians, they don't have a miraculous biohacking routine that they follow that keeps them alive. They have, you know, mostly good genetics and some favorable environmental factors and some good lifestyle factors that protect them against the, chronic diseases. But this is just a good hint of why these centenarians get chronic diseases later in life, that they have a younger biological age. Your lifestyle obviously does have a huge important factor or a huge effect on your life expectancy as well. And the more favorable lifestyle factors you have, you know, such as a healthy diet, regular physical movement, social connection, good sleep, and avoiding alcohol and smoking, then the longer your life expectancy generally is. So in this study, you can see having seven to eight of these healthy lifestyle factors was associated with significantly greater life life expectancy across all age groups. So it doesn't matter if you're in your forties, or in your eighties, or in your centenarian years. The more healthy lifestyle factors you have, the greater your life expectancy is. So it's never too late to start. You can always increase your life expectancy and increase your health span by adopting a healthy lifestyle, and avoiding other unhealthy lifestyle factors. But most of us, we don't have centenarian genetics, we don't have the favorable genes that would enable us to live to a 100 years old, and most people will die to one of the top leading causes of death, such as heart disease. You know, thirty percent of people will die to heart disease based on the statistics. And the reason for that is that heart disease is something you get first. You know, most peep the average age of a heart attack is 65. So that is the time where most people start to die off from the heart disease, which is why the cardiovascular diseases and stroke and those kind of similar conditions are the leading cause of death. The average person just gets those diseases before they reach, let's say, eighties, which is the average diagnosis for Alzheimer's or dementia. So early in your life, you don't have a significant risk for heart disease or Alzheimer's or cancer, but once you start to reach fifties, sixties, and seventies, that's the time where the biggest risk of death comes from heart disease and cancer, mostly. After the age of 80, that's where the Alzheimer's risk takes over slowly. And only if you reach the age of 100, you could, you know, technically say that the cause of death was age. Like, Jerome, he technically died because of heart failure, and he had kidney disease as well, but his, you know, organs started to fail because he was so old. He reached the maximum human lifespan, if that makes sense. But the average person never reaches that. So if you want to live to 100, you have to make sure that you don't get heart disease in your sixties. And likewise, you have to make sure that you don't get Alzheimer's in your eighties. What are some of the important lifestyle factors for preventing heart disease? This is a list of the essential eight by the American Heart Association, and they are: get healthy sleep, manage your weight, control your cholesterol, manage your blood sugar, manage blood pressure, eat healthy, be more active, and quit tobacco. You know, obviously, there's a lot of nuance to all of these things. I'm not gonna go into the exact details, but these are the essential eight points that are recommended by the American Heart Association for preventing heart disease. But you also have to take it in combination with the biology of aging as well, because age and aging is the single biggest risk factor for heart disease and Alzheimer's and cancer and death. The older you are, the greater your risk of any of these chronic diseases is. So slowing down the speed of your biological aging is also very crucial for, as a strategy for protecting against these chronic diseases. Neurodegeneration and Alzheimer's and Parkinson's, which are the same similar like conditions, they also have very much a cardiovascular component. So the brain obviously is is a cerebrovascular organ. It has a lot of the same characteristics as your blood vessels. And heart disease and neurodegeneration actually have very similar causes or they have the similar pathologies. There are obviously some differences. Key differences like with neurodegeneration, you see this accumulation of amyloid beta in the brain, and you have the blood brain barrier dysfunction. Whereas in heart disease, you have the plaque buildup in the arteries, but they have a lot of things overlapping such as metabolic diseases like insulin resistance, inflammation, decreased blood flow, hypertension, obesity, hyperglycemia, and hyperlipidemia. So a healthy you know, all the things that you do for preventing heart disease will also protect you again protect your, let's say, neurodegeneration risk. From a metabolic health standpoint, then the biggest thing that combines all these things together is metabolic syndrome. So metabolic syndrome is a condition where you have three or more of the following. You have high blood pressure, high waist circumference, high triglycerides, high fasting blood sugar, and low HDL cholesterol. If you have three or more, then that's characterized as metabolic syndrome, And metabolic syndrome increases the risk of heart disease two times and increases the risk of overall mortality by one point five times. And the key pathology or the key characteristic of metabolic syndrome, which is characterized by this wider waist circumference, is visceral fat. So fat around the organs, fat inside the muscles, fat around the different vital organs that, you know, regulate the metabolism, such as the liver and pancreas. So make making sure that, obviously, obesity is talked a lot about when it comes to disease prevention and overall health, but the type of obesity matters a lot more. So the specific type of obesity characterized by higher visceral fat appears to be the driving factor of the accumulation of these risk factors for heart disease, for example. You can easily measure your visceral fat at home, or it's obviously not a 100% accurate measurement, but it's one of the easiest ways to just assess your metabolic health and body composition. You can just look at the waist to hip ratio. So you measure first around the waist, which is on the belly button, and then around the hips. And then you divide the waist with the hip, and then you get the number. For women, if it's 0.8 or lower, then that's low risk. For men, 0.95, that's low risk. Moderate risk for women is zero point eighty one to zero point eighty five, and for men, zero point ninety six to one. High risk for women is zero point eighty six or higher, and for men, it's a one or higher, their waist to hip ratio. So if you have a high waist to hip ratio, then that's reflective of some visceral fat or just poorer body composition. You can also look at body mass index, which isn't as accurate as the waist to hip ratio, but it's still a rough estimate. And it's again like a simple measurement you can use to assess, okay, what is my risk based on my body composition right now? The lowest risk of mortality with a BMI is seen between 20 to 20 five. If your BMI is above thirty, then that is associated with a two to four year decrease in life expectancy. But if the BMI is above forty, then it's above then it's a eight to ten years decrease in life expectancy. So the optimal is somewhere between 20 to 25, generally. Usually, if it's below 20 and they see an increased risk of mortality, then that can be some some, something related to, like alcoholism or drug abuse, so it's not it's not necessarily bad to have a low BMI granted that you have other healthy lifestyle factors. Step two is to slow the decline. So how do you slow down the deterioration of the body that happens with age? Because like we said, age is the biggest risk factor for getting to chronic diseases, and you can control the speed of your biological aging. You can determine how fast you age, and everyone has a different biological age. It's the biological age isn't always the same as your chronological age. The biological age essentially, you know, it means what's your health, what's the age of your health. And a very good illustration of this difference between biological ages is, this this is an actual study, an actual biopsy of actual humans. So in one picture, you can see the 70 year old triathlete who has a lot of muscle tone, very little fat. The white parts are the kind of the fat tissue. And the upper picture is 74 year old sedentary man who has a lot more this visceral fat, intramuscular fat around the, the muscle tissue. And they have significantly less fat. And and you can see that the 70 year old triathlete has a very similar muscle composition as the 40 year old triathlete. So they've been able to maintain their physical function, you know, for decades. Whereas the other sedentary person who hasn't done anything about their decline of muscle and, physical fitness, then it's a significantly worse profile, a lot more of this visceral fat. And it's been also found that 80 year olds who are trained, who are exercising regularly, they have the same functional capacity measured by muscle strength and VO2 max as a sedentary 50 year old. So it's not a high standard to have the same functional capacity as a sedentary 50 year old, but if you keep in mind that that person is 80 years old, so 30 years older, then I think it's still a significant win. You let like, the 80 year old who is sedentary and doesn't have the functional capacity, they are at a much higher risk of death and accelerated aging because of that. So you can significantly control your speed of aging with lifestyle, especially exercise. VO2max declines with age. In this graph, the dark dots, black dots, are octogenarian athletes, so 80 year olds who exercise more professionally kind of, they have a significantly higher VO two max than a regular 80 year old, the white dots. So you can see there's a pretty big gap between the two. And VO two max or cardiorespiratory fitness is one of the biggest predictors of mortality. People with the highest VO two max have up to three hundred percent, lower mortality risk than the people with the lowest VO two max. So maintaining cardiorespiratory fitness that goes down with age significantly increases your longevity and reduces your risk of chronic diseases and mortality. Smoking usually increases your risk of mortality by two to three times, so like two hundred percent, but having poor cardiorespiratory fitness increases it by three hundred percent. So smoking is actually better for you than being unfit. Obviously smoking is bad, but not having cardio respiratory fitness is worse than smoking, based on the studies. Heart rate is another reflection of your heart function and cardio respiratory fitness. But with age you see that your heart rate, resting heart rate increases. And the greater, the higher your resting heart rate, the bigger your risk of mortality also is. So every 10 beat increase in your resting heart rate above 45 beats per minute is associated with nine percent increased mortality risk. So someone who has a resting heart rate of 80 or above has up to forty five percent higher risk of mortality compared to someone who has a resting heart rate of 45. So lower the lower the better. And if you have a lower resting heart rate, then that's obviously better for your mortality risk, but it's also a sign of biological youth. Because with age, your resting heart rate increases. What are the things that affect your resting heart rate? Body mass index again, so being overweight, having too high of a body mass index is associated with increased resting heart rate, and not sleeping enough. If you sleep less than seven hours, then that's associated with increased resting heart rate. So the optimal amount of sleep is seven to eight hours for adults, generally. Heart rate variability is another thing reflective of heart function that declines with age, and when you're young, you have a pretty high HRV, but with age, that decreases. Obviously, all the healthy lifestyle factors contribute to your HRV like exercise and good diet, but daily steps in a linear fashion increase your HRV. So the more steps you take per day, even up to 15,000, 17,000 steps a day, that increases your HRV. Muscle goes down with age similar to via to max. So your muscle and strength peak in your like adulthood, and after that there's a decrease. How fast you decrease depends a lot on your lifestyle. Having low muscle mass increases your muscle risk of mortality by twenty three to thirty five percent, but having low muscle strength increases that risk by ninety eight to one hundred and eighty two percent. So low muscle is bad for longevity, but low strength is much more important, so low strength is associated with almost double the risk than low muscle mass. And when you look at what are the biggest killers of elderly people, accidental deaths in particular, then their their falls. All the people who don't have the ability to hold themselves up, they fall, they break a hip, and their risk of death within a year is very high. So muscle strength prevents you from falling. It enables you to hang hang on to things, and it's a big risk for the elderly people. Strength is also associated with lower dementia risk and, even like dementia mortality. People with the lowest strength have up to seventy two percent higher risk of dementia and eighty seven percent higher risk of dementia mortality compared to people with the highest strength. And, your cognitive function is the last part of biological youth. People with the sharpest cognitive decline have also the highest risk of mortality. And cognitive function is something that does decrease with age, but again, how fast it decreases greatly determines how long you're gonna live. And in this study, they looked at centenarians. They did this very simple and very basic exam, mini mental state exam. It just asks, okay, what day it is, where are you, what's your family name, all those things. Like every one of us here would probably score the maximum points. But what they found among the centenarians is that those individuals who scored 26 out of 30 had seventeen percent increased mortality because, you know, obviously, they're centenarians still. But those who scored less than 26 points, so they got, you know, more wrong than that, they had a forty two percent increased risk of mortality. So maintaining cognitive function is also is just a reflection of how fast are you deteriorating. If you see a rapid decline in your cognitive function similar to your VO2max and muscle strength, then that's a sign that you're, you know, heading down the cliff, so to say, and the only thing or the most important thing at that point is to slow down the descent. So how do you achieve this longevity leap? How do you jump over this disease and death is to maintain physical health, cognitive function, useful biomarkers that would resemble a lower biological age. And as a result of that, you will also maintain this lower biological age, which is measured obviously through things like VO2max and muscle strength and heart rate and all the other biomarkers combined. And, I obviously didn't go into all the details of how to achieve this. This is gonna be the topic of my next book. It's not ready yet, but you can sign up for the updates at, thelongevityleap.com. Or if you have any other questions, then you can also send me an email at simseamland dot com.