Johanna Quas is a 98 year old gymnast from Germany. She has the Guinness World Record for being the world's oldest active gymnast. And now the shoulder stands. And after that, Hey. My name is Seem and in this video we're gonna talk about Johanna's routines related to her diet, her exercise, and just life in general. And the reason I decided to do this video is because I made a reel about Johanna on Instagram and it got up to 10,000,000 views. Johanna went first viral in 2012 when her performance at the tournament of masters was uploaded on YouTube. She was 86 years old at the time. At the moment Johanna is 98 years old and she's gonna turn 100 years old in 2025. Johanna also has an Instagram profile with over 50,000 followers where she posts regular footage from her everyday life. As you can see, she has an active family life and she also does some form of physical exercise every day. So how did Johanna become the world's oldest gymnast? Johanna was born in 1925 in Germany, and she started gymnastics at a young age. Her family already had a long history of gymnastics, and she began competing in gymnastics at the age of 10. Now, Johanna probably has some good longevity genetics. Otherwise she wouldn't be 98 years old right now. The most impressive thing about Johanna isn't the fact that she's 98 years old but the fact that she's able to do these amazing gymnastics exercises and tricks that many 20 year olds even aren't able to do. This kind of physical function is the first thing that declines with age, but Johanna has able to maintain this ability for nine decades. Based on the current information, Johanna isn't actively competing anymore and she's not doing, like, active gymnastics works every day. She does have a daily exercise routine of mobility exercises that she does in her bed every morning. This is what enables her to maintain her flexibility and mobility. Flexibility declines with age, mobility declines with age, and realize that if you don't use it, you lose it. But Johanna does these kinds of exercises every day to maintain this fluidity and this mobility. What kind of a diet does Johanna follow? Johanna also sleeps eight hours every day and she might take a short nap during the day. One of the most important parts to her longevity is probably her involvement in family life. She has children and grandchildren who she, at least based on the Instagram profile, spends a lot of time with. There's a lot of research suggesting that loneliness is bad for longevity and the elderly people who are alone have a higher risk of mortality. Johanna's husband died several years ago when he was in his eighties and the only people Johanna really has are her grandchildren and children. So this is probably her purpose to staying alive. There's a lot of research suggesting that a sense of purpose and having a sense of meaning in life increases longevity. Overall it's amazing to see someone in their nineties maintaining such high level of physical capability. Of course she's not a power lifter, she's not an endurance athlete, but it is impressive to see someone in their nineties being able to do active gymnastics. Based on the current situation, I would say that Johanna will become a centenarian and I am interested to see what kind of tricks she's gonna do at her 100 year birthday. If you wanna check out this 70 year old who does also Ninja Warrior training, then check out this video. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click a like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.