VO two max is something you can't really game the system with VO two max. You're really you're either fit or you're not fit. Say, yes, maybe you have a strong heart, but if your lungs are weak, if your, you know, mitochondria are impaired somehow, your VO two max is gonna be low. So having a high VO two max really means that all of your systems are kind of operating on all cylinders, and I think that's one of the reasons why, all of these studies are coming out showing, oh, it's very, very highly linked to, you know, health span and lifespan. Welcome to the SimaN podcast. I'm your host Sim Lund, and our guest today is Brady Homer. Brady has a master's degree in human performance from the University of Florida. He's a science author, marathon runner, and he posts information online about exercise performance, VO two max, and nutrition. Brady, welcome to the show. Same. Thanks for having me on. I'm excited to chat. Yeah. I'm also excited to talk with you because, I was following you on Twitter. So you had some nice posts about exercise and VO two max that were interesting, and I also noticed that you were following me. So I figured out why would I have a, like, a conversation, and we'll have some interesting things, to talk about. Yeah. Definitely. I think, it's happened to me a lot where, basically, people I meet on Twitter or x then become either guests on my podcast or I go on their podcast. So it's a great place to to meet people and exchange ideas. Yeah. So you're kind of new to this online congregation, I guess, then? A little bit, I think. I mean, I've been, you know, on podcasting for a while. I've been on x for for quite a while, I think. But just kind of in terms of interacting with, you know, science and health influencer influencers, I guess, we could call them. I feel like I'm I'm pretty new in that space, but, it's been interesting over the past, you know, five to ten years to see x evolve into, like, somewhere that, people can share information rather than just argue about stuff. But, of course, a lot of that goes on as well, the arguing. Yeah. Yeah. And I found your content on Twitter oryx. And, yeah, it was a very interesting specifically about things related to VO2 max and, cardio and endurance. And you've written a book about it as well, VO2 max essentials. So, yeah, I'm, mostly interested and excited to talk about VO2 max because it's one of those really trendy topics over the past few years in the longevity space that is considered like a very important biomarker for longevity. And obviously many people want to increase it and know how to do that. So why don't we, like, maybe start with what is VO two max, and what does it actually, like, measure, or what does it mean? Yeah. For sure. So VO two max, it is, I would say, one of the most common or if not the most common measure of your cardio respiratory fitness. And what the actual number represents is the maximal rate of your body's oxygen consumption during exercise to exhaustion. So if you were to go into a laboratory and start running on a treadmill and they increase the treadmill speed and maybe even the incline and you ran and ran and ran and walked until you couldn't walk anymore, the point your oxygen consumption at the point of exhaustion would be your VO two max. And what it reflects is the integrated ability of your lungs, so your respiratory system, your cardiovascular system, your skeletal muscles, and your mitochondria to take in oxygen, deliver that oxygen to your mitochondria, and then turn or use that oxygen to produce energy or ATP. And I think, you know, we'll get into this probably, but I think that that is one of the reasons why it's so strongly linked to health span, longevity, lower rates of morbidity and mortality is because it's not just something like hand grip strength where, oh, you're that means your grip strength is stronger, which is still, you know, associated with longevity, interestingly. But VO two max is something you can't really game the system with VO two max. You're really you're either fit or you're not fit. And say, yes. Maybe you have a strong heart, but if your lungs are weak, if your, you know, mitochondria are impaired somehow, your VO two max is gonna be low. So having a high VO two max really means that all of your systems are kind of operating on all cylinders, and I think that's one of the reasons why, all of these studies are coming out showing, oh, it's very, very highly linked to, you know, health span and lifespan. Yeah. It's like a multi organ biomarker kind of whereas, yeah, if you have high grip strength, then you could be, like, this overweight power lifter who is just very super strong, but who has, like, you know, mass massive belly and, extra body fat. So, yeah, I guess you can't have a high VO two max and being, like, super overrate, at the same time. Yeah. Correct. It would be it would be very hard to be in bad health and have a, you know, a VO two max in the high fifties to sixties to seventies. Like, you very you very rarely see that, and so it it, correlates pretty well like that, with that. And like you said, if you get somebody who is overweight, who had metabolic syndrome, but, yeah, maybe they can deadlift 300. I don't think that that would predict their longevity as much as something like VO two Max does. This episode is brought to you by Bone Charge, my favorite company for blue blocking glasses, red light therapy devices, and red light light bulbs. These items are essential for keeping your sleep wake on the cycles aligned in a world that tries to mess them up. Instead of looking at your phone before bed and letting the blue light disrupt your melatonin production, why not wear blue blockers instead that prevent that from happening? Instead of having your bedroom lit up with bright lights, use the more sleep friendly alternative by opting for flicker free red light light bulbs that don't disrupt your sleep. Boncharge also has amazing infrared sauna blankets that can give you the same health benefits as the traditional sauna. You also get the unique benefits of infrared light that improves joint and skin health. Head over to boncharge.com/seamland and use the code seam, s I I m, for a 15% discount. Is that the only way to know your VO2 max? You do the, like, the running test where you're going to near a failure, or is there, like, other because, like, some of the clocks or these smartwatches, they assess your VO2 max based on your, like, running speed or something like that. What do you think about that? Yeah. If if you want a true test, so if you really want to know what a measure what your VO2 max actually measures at, you're going to have to do one of those maximal tests. But you can certainly estimate it using, like you mentioned, you know, if you have a smartwatch or an Oura ring actually now does it, Apple Watch, Garmin, something like that. It will give you an estimate of your VO two max. And as you mentioned, what those commonly do is just use, a measure of your fitness. So it'll take, you know, your running speed and your heart rate at that running speed and different metrics like that. You know, it'll integrate your weight as well, to estimate your VO two max. And those can be accurate, but they're not always the best. You know, I've seen them be off as much as anywhere from five to ten ml's per kg per minute, which, you know, if you're really concerned about VO two max and with the data that even one to two ml per kg increases or decreases can actually, you know, affect health outcomes, then those estimates can be very, you know, important if they're wrong. So they can you can estimate it with that. Other ways, though, that you can do it if you're not wanting to do a maximal exercise test. There are several submaximal tests that you can do. One is called the Cooper twelve minute test. That's a common test where, essentially, you just see how far you can run-in twelve minutes and then you plug your time or, you plug your distance into a calculator and it will estimate your VO two max. You can do a one mile run, a one and a half mile run test. So so several different ways that you can do it. But if you really want the gold standard, you're gonna have to do, like, a a treadmill test, or, alternatively, you can exercise on a bike as well. Yeah. Yeah. I've I've taken, like, maybe three of these ERTmax tests in my life. And, yeah, I I guess it might be also like a because, you know, if you're not used to doing this kind of exertion, then you might, like, cap out, or tap out before you reach your actual true maximum limit. So you need to realize, I guess, it also psychologically teach yourself to actually reach the limit if you want to learn about the true your own true, maximum VO to max. And Yeah. Definitely. Requires a little bit of going into, like, the pain cave or, like, just, I guess, like, just realizing that, okay. This maximum isn't actually your maximum that you can actually go with, further. Yeah. It's, it's very hard to do. And, a lot of the times when you go and do one of those tests or if you're reading a a research study where they report participants' cardiorespiratory fitness, they'll actually often use, a term called VO two peak. Mhmm. And that essentially indicates that the participant went as long as they could or you went as long as you could on the treadmill, but there were certain indicators that would, would indicate that you didn't actually reach your maximal oxygen consumption. And so, if I'm doing a VO two max on somebody in the lab, and they they call it quits, they say I can't run anymore. What we're gonna do to confirm if they were at their VO two max is were they within 10 beats per minute of their age predicted maximal heart rate in addition to, you know, them just saying they can't go any longer. We'll also measure something called respiratory exchange ratio or, otherwise known as respiratory quotient. That essentially is measuring the ratio of carbon dioxide produced to oxygen consumed, and it it basically is an indicator of your, substrate utilization. So an RER of 1.1 is, indicative that you're burning almost all carbohydrates, so glycolytic metabolism. RER of 0.85 would be mostly fat metabolism or sorry. 0.85 would be somewhere in the middle. 0.7 would indicate kinda almost fat metabolism. So, theoretically, if you're at your VO two max, you're gonna be burning nearly all carbohydrates to produce energy. And so you wanna see an RER of 1.1. And then you want their RPE, their exertion to be at a 20 or around a twenty, eighteen to 20 indicating that, on a scale of six to 20. So, you know, I feel that this is the hardest that I can go. So if all of those criteria are met, as well as, you know, we've reached a plateau in oxygen consumption, then you can call it a max. Otherwise, we just say VO two peak. So they're pretty much the same thing, but there are, some meaningful differences between those two. But, going back to your point, doing multiple of those tests may be good or at least doing two of them if you're really interested because you learn during the first one. Oh, you you know, immediately when you stop that test, you think, oh, I could have gone thirty seconds thirty seconds longer or something like that. So, the next time you go, you might be able to actually push yourself more and get kind of a few higher points on on that VO two max test. Yeah. That that's been there several times. Mhmm. And some sometimes it's, also, like, I guess the skill development of running on a treadmill or if you're not used to doing that, then, you're kind of, yeah, requires the skill side as well a little bit. But Yeah. Yeah. When we're talking about doing the tests, then so what what the at least of the people that I did the test with told me was that, you know, when you're doing the test, it's gonna keep rising, rising. And at some point, even though you're running faster, your oxygen consumption, like, peaks, and then it starts to, like, decrease slightly. So, is that where the VO2 max is even though you're you're continuing to run? Or is it related to the speed at which you're going? Or yeah. Like, is there any, like before you actually reached a failure in terms of you planting you know, face planting on the treadmill, is there, like, the VO two max is reached before that, before you actually face plant to the treadmill? Right. Yeah. The VO two plateau is actually the the primary indicator that you've reached your VO two max. So say you're doing a stage, maybe you're running in the treadmill is at a 10% grade and you're running at, you know, say, six miles per hour. They increase the grade, but to 12% in seven miles per hour. And so you're running harder, but your oxygen consumption, like you said, you'll just see a a plateau versus a you know, it keeps going up. And that plateau means, oh, you're consuming as the as much oxygen as your body can't because you're continuing to run faster, but you're not consuming any more oxygen. So that's the main indicator of, oh, you actually reached your, your VO two max. Right. Gotcha. So what's the, like, what's the, good amount? What's a good number for VO two max, and what's, like, the ranges? What's a bad VO two max, and what's, like, a elite level VO two max, and what's, like, good for, like, mortality and longevity? Yeah. So it's obviously going to depend on several factors, age being one of them, sex being one of them, or whether you're a male or a female. So I'll kind of I'll do my best to maybe generalize and just say, like, if you're a man or a woman between 30 and 50 or maybe, like, you know, 20 and 40 years old, this would be a good number. So I would say there are some people out there, and this isn't maybe based on the strongest of evidence, but they would say if you're under 50 years old, you should have a VO two max of over 50, at least. It should be over 50 ml's per kg per minute. And I would I would stand by that. I would say even, you know, if you're not an endurance athlete, even if you don't do a lot of cardio, you should probably still get your VO two max up to around 50, if you're, you know, age 50 or below. Now 20 year olds, 30 year olds, I think mid fifties mid to high fifties would be a good range to to probably shoot for. That's just going to be your general general fitness, though. So, you know, if you're a CrossFit athlete, if you're mainly strength training based, but you do cardio a few days per week, somewhere around that 50 range, even 50 to 60 would be great. I think 45 even is kind of a recreationally active. Somebody might have a VO2 max of 40 to 45, but even then, you're getting into the range where it might be a little bit low. Anything below 40 for somebody who's aged 50 or below, maybe even 60 or below, that's that's somewhat low. You're kinda getting into the sedentary levels of of fitness if you're kind of, I think, below below 30. I'll go towards the lower end, and then we can kinda talk about the higher end. So what's a really bad VO two max in terms of kind of clinical bad clinical outcomes is somewhere around, like, 15 to 18. And why I say that is because that sort of represents this frailty threshold where you need at least a VO two max of 15 to 18 to just complete activities of daily living. So getting out of bed, walking around the block to carry some groceries, going upstairs, Those all require a minimum VO two max of around 15 or so. And so if you fall below that, you can't really do anything. It's hard to get out of bed. It's hard to go up to stairs. And so once you're below that, you're in a territory, a dangerous territory of, you know, I can't really do much. It's just kind of like what they, would call refer to as, like, the frailty threshold for for fitness. Yeah. And then going to the other end of the spectrum, I think if that if you're very, very cardiorespiratory, fit, A VO two max of, you know, something in the sixties is fantastic regardless of your age. As you age past 50, you know, anything of a VO two max above 50, and if you have something like a 60 is just incredible. And then elite endurance athletes, sub elite and even an elite endurance athletes, they're probably going to have a VO two max anywhere between seventy and ninety. Those are typically I think 70 seems to be kind of like the, that's almost like the gait that you need to at least pass before you're even going to, like, be able to be considered to be like an elite endurance athlete. There's almost like a this VO two max of a 70 is like a a gatekeeper. So you'll typically won't find a endurance athlete with with a VO two max below 70, maybe 65, but, they're gonna have to be really, really, really efficient if they have a VO two max of 65 and they're competing at a high level. So between sixty sixty and and ninety and then, you you know, some of, like, the highest ever recorded are going to be, like, these, Norwegian cross country skiers, some of these cyclists who have recorded Viu Maxes in, like, you know, the mid nineties. I even think a 100. Oskar Svensson is a a cyclist. I think he he scored a 100 VO two max once, which is Mhmm. Just, like, absurd. So Right. Was he also, like, a faster cyclist then? Or Oh, yeah. He, I think, was maybe Tour de France champion, but I'm definitely like a Tour de France, level cyclist. So super elite yeah. Yeah. I'm not super into the cycling world. I'm more kind of into the running world, but I just know he was a incredible cyclist. Mhmm. Yeah. And I think I've heard or I've seen that, Alaskan sled dogs have a VO2 max of, like, 200 or something. Yeah. 200 and then horses. Horses, I think, I was reading a paper once where I think the horses had a VO two max of, like, 350 or something like that. Mhmm. And then I think hummingbirds actually have the highest VO two max of any animal in the animal kingdom. I think that their VO two max I'll have to fact check, you know, this, but, somewhere like 800 to a thousand, it's, like, absurdly high, just because they're so small and they're all, like, you know, fast twitch, like, glycolytic muscle fibers and whatever because they gotta fly all day long. So, it's kinda crazy. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So what's the, like, age related decrease? So, like, 50 is a good number to aim for for pretty much as long as you can. Even if you're over 50 years old, that will be, like, a good goal to have. But, there's gonna be some decrease re related to aging. So how big is that decrease and, like, how can you slow it down? The the decrease, as far as what the literature would indicate, seems to be about 10% per decade after about age 50 to 60. Between between age 50 and 60, that's where the decline tends to start, maybe even sooner depending on how active you stay. But around age 50, you're gonna start to see about a a 10% decrease in VO two max per decade. And so let's use your example, I guess, just to kind of, you know, work down or as somebody ages. You know, if you if you have a VO two max of 50, at age 50 so at age 60, you're gonna have a VO two max of 45. At age, 70, you know, you're gonna have a VO two max of around 40. And then, you know so say, like, five mls per kg per decade. So that means by the time you're, you know, if you live to be 80, you know, you're gonna have a VO2 max below 30, so 25 to 30, which is still above that threshold that we were talking about earlier, but it's it's still fairly low. And that would kind of indicate that, one, fifty is a good target when you're 50 years old, but I think that that is good evidence to increase your VO two max as high as you can before you start to reach that decline. So in your twenties, your thirties, your forties, do things to increase your VO2 max before it starts to decline. You know, build it up, maintain it for as long as possible, and then it does you know, before it inevitably starts to decline as it seems to do in people who maintain their activity levels and people who decrease their activity levels, which is kind of depressing. You know, you see masters athletes and even their VO two maxes start to decline, around the same age. It declines at the same rate as people who don't nearly engage in kind of those levels of activity. But the important thing to note is, obviously so you have a master's athlete who's starting up here at age 50. You have somebody who doesn't exercise starting here. So if they decrease at the same rate, you'll notice that the masters athlete is still, you know, well above the Right. Sedentary person. So you're gonna have a higher VO two max at the same age even though it declines, at a similar rate. So you're going to be, you know, ultimately at age 80, 85, 90. You're gonna have a higher a higher VO two max. So you need, like, a just a buffer zone, like a bigger, reserve kind of? Exactly. You know, similar to, like, muscle mass. You know, you wanna build as much much muscle mass as you can in your thirties, in your forties, in your fifties because, sure, you can build muscle with age. Of course, you can maintain muscle mass with age. But for the most part, it seems that muscle mass declines as we get older. And so you want to build up that reserve before, you know, things start to decline. Something interesting though is that there is there's a researcher. His name is Ben Levine. He works at UT Southwestern, and he is a huge, huge research in cardiovascular and cardiac physiology and how the heart changes with aging. And he would seem to, I think, argue that you can probably maybe maintain your VO two max for a little bit longer or prevent some of that decline if you really engage in a lot of exercise. You're gonna have to train hard, but, like, if you're 50 or you're 60, maybe VO two max doesn't inevitably decline, but you're going to have to engage in a lot of high intensity training, really work on your base endurance training and things like that. So it's certainly possible to increase your VO two max as you get older, depending on your fitness levels and maybe prolong the decline. But what most people obviously do naturally is just exercise less. I mean Mhmm. Let's be honest. You know, when you're 50, you're not the same as when you were 30, and you're probably exercising in a different way. You're probably not you know, if you were exercising for fifteen hours a week when you were 30, you know, maybe when you're 50 or 60, you're not exercising that much. But if you were somehow able to maintain those levels of exercise, then, you know, I think that there could be an argument perhaps that we could kind of maintain our fitness levels, same goes for muscle mass, for a bit longer. But it just seems that a lot of people go through these periods where they're not exercising, so your fitness decreases. The next time you do that, it decreases a bit more. So, it's just an inevitable consequence of becoming less active, essentially. Yeah. Like, I I think in the muscle loss side, there is that you're not, like, gradually losing the muscle that much. It's more about you lose it very fast during periods of being sedentary or injury. And then at other times when you are exercising, you are slowing it down. So it's, you know, over the course of decades, you just have too many times of being sedentary or missing out on the potential gains. And, yeah, like, at the other times, it's harder to, like, build it to regain it so you never get back to your baseline. So you're all just kind of a stepwise decline rather than a like a like a, you know, like a sand. Exactly. Exactly. I think that's what happens for sure. And it's a lot easier to lose fitness, than it is to to gain it back. You know, if you within, you know, two to three weeks even if you're, say, sick, say you get COVID or something like that, you don't exercise for two weeks. Your fitness levels can just crash during those two weeks without any activity. And then to build that up, it could take months of heavy training. So it's really it's really not fair how biology kind of works like that. You know, you'll lose muscle mass within, like, one to two days of stopping working out, or at least it feels like it, and then it feels like it takes you a a week or a year to to regain what you lost. But, like, this doesn't probably happen if you're, like, you know, 20, 30 years old, or does it already happen at that point? It's just gonna be easier to regain it when you're Yes. It's I think that that's the key. I think it's easier to regain it at that age. But even if you're 20 and you're saying, like, doing bed rest or something or inactive for a few weeks where you're really not doing anything, you can still lose a lot of fitness. And, actually, the fitter you are, the more fitness you actually might lose. So if you take a really fit athlete and they do nothing for a month, they're obviously gonna lose a lot of fitness because they have a lot fitness to begin with. Right. Whereas somebody who's not fit, you know, they might not have that much to lose. But I think that the athletes can regain that, fitness back quicker in part due to kind of a, quote, unquote, muscle memory type of thing. I know that that's kind of a word that people might, like, look down upon, but I think our muscles and even our heart cardiovascular system has kind of this memory where, oh, it remembers, you know, you used to be an athlete. You used to lift a lot of weights. And so once you start training again, you'll regain that fitness fairly quickly. Right. So when it comes to, like, Vio2max and cardiorespiratory fitness, so what are the things that you need to train? So, obviously, you need to, like, do cardio and different methods of the cardio, but do you need to, like what's the biggest, like, like, I guess, organ that does the biggest lifting in terms of that figuratively speaking that, is it the heart? Is it the lungs? Is it the your calf muscles? Is it your whatever, like, other type of, physical function? Yeah. Obviously, you wanna train, you know, by exercising. You're you're gonna you're going to be training everything. But Right. In terms of what the I guess, the limiting factor for VO two max, at least in in athletes who are somewhat fit, the consensus seems to be that is that it is your stroke volume. And what your stroke volume is is how much blood your heart can pump every time it beats. And so when you look at elite athletes and say, like, oh, where if you know, what's, like, the limiting factor for their Bu two max? Is it their lungs, the their ability to get oxygen in? No. That doesn't appear to be the case because our lungs actually are overbuilt for exercise. So they're really we have more lung capacity than, we really need to do the job of getting oxygen to to our body and getting enough oxygen in. So the lungs don't seem to be the limiter in healthy people. Now if someone has, like, asthma or bronchitis or a pulmonary disease, that's that's different. Their lungs are going to be limiting their performance there. The mitochondria don't also seem to be kind of the limiting factor. So if you, you know, give the mitochondria more oxygen, they will readily utilize that oxygen. So most people, I guess, would say, you know, they have enough mitochondrial capacity, but the heart really seems to be kind of what's what's limiting. And so it's you can't just, I guess, train stroke volume. I mean, you kind of can. You do endurance training. Low intensity, steady state endurance training tends to be good at improving stroke volume because you're allowing the heart to fill kind of fully with blood and eject that blood. So it's working on actually increasing the size of that heart muscle, and the thickness of that heart muscle too. So that's known as eccentric hypertrophy. So if you looked at an endurance athlete's heart, they have a very, very large left ventricle. And it's a, you know, it's a physiological adaptation. It can kind of increase the risk for atrial fibrillation and things like that, and put them at risk for that. Whether that's necessarily, like, harmful is kind of a a subject of debate, but they have a large ventricle. And so that seems to be one of the main adaptations when you do endurance training. Your heart is going to get bigger. Your left ventricle is going to get bigger. It's able to pump out more blood. And that's one of the things that actually helps to increase your VO two max. So if your heart can pump more blood to the rest of the body, it gets you know, it can circulate more oxygen. It can deliver more oxygen to your muscles, your mitochondria, and then your body can use that to to produce energy. And so I mentioned the best way to kind of train that would be lower maybe intensity, low to moderate intensity like endurance training. But then, obviously, I think what that what high intensity training does is obviously important too. It does help improve your mitochondrial capacity, increase mitochondrial enzymes, increase the ability of the mitochondria to produce energy, better than low intensity training ACTA seems to be. So high intensity seems to be better for that. Low intensity, I would argue, is probably better for maybe increasing stroke volume even though some studies would show, you know, high intensity training can improve stroke volume as well. But that's why you need a little bit of of both as everyone you know, all the arguments eventually boil down to. Right. So the enlargement of the heart is just this positive adaptation to the, I guess, the exercise training. And, you know, may maybe there is, yeah, like, a point of diminishing returns at some point. Like, you know, you mentioned that if it's harmful is, is debated. But, if you look at, like, you know, generally, athletes or, like, not necessarily, like, elite elite athletes, but, you know, I guess, like, recreational athletes and, like, slightly more, more athletic people do have a lower risk of all cause mortality and heart disease. So, yeah, even even with the the potential risk of this AFib, then, like, I guess the total outcome is still that, those individuals have a lower risk, of, heart disease overall. Yeah. And, you know, there's I'm sure maybe you're aware that there's kind of this this recent data that the lifelong endurance athletes, they present with a little more coronary artery calcification. There have been some studies showing that Right. Mostly, these studies are in men, but, you know, they've been doing endurance training all their life. They're runners. They're cyclists. They're triathletes. They have higher levels of coronary artery calcium compared to people who exercise less, or even sedentary individuals. But the plaque tends to be more calcified, and hard plaque versus soft plaque. And, you know, we don't have to go into the details of what all that means, but, essentially, there's the argument that the calcified plaque is less likely to rupture. So they're not really at a risk of higher risk of a stroke or a heart attack than people who have less calcium. It's just that the calcium is like a different morphology. And the same goes for atrial fibrillation. You know? Endurance athletes, they almost have, like, a five times greater risk of atrial fibrillation compared to the general population. But as you mentioned, all the other studies would show that despite that, they suffer from less cardiovascular events. They tend to live longer on average. So it doesn't seem to translate to the outcomes. So there seem to be these other adaptations that are going on that are probably protecting against, the other risk factors that that might be higher. Yeah. Yeah. And, I know about those calcification studies as well that, you know, yeah, even if they have higher calcium slightly, then, they still have a lower risk than the sedentary people. So exercise is so powerful that even though it increases your coronary artery calcification, at some point, it still lowers your total risk, which, you know, means that you still want to do it, and still want to engage in that kind of activity. Yeah. Definitely. But I guess what what's the, like, mechanism for that, the calcifications? Or it's, like, just inflammation or the chronic stress if you do it, like, too much? Or Yeah. I think multiple things. So inflammation is probably certainly one. You know, we we know that, you know, high intensity training does lead to at least acute inflammation. So that could be one of the mechanisms. You know, you are placing a lot of stress on the heart when you're doing endurance activity. You're elevating things like, you know, these damage markers that are increased, you know, that the heart releases kind of during endurance exercise. There's just the physical act of blood flow, which is was good for our cardiovascular system, but the blood flow may be causing, you know, some sort of fibrosis or inflammation. And so, really, it could just be that, you know, if you exercise for too hard, too hard for too long and you don't really give your heart time to recover, and over years and years and years, you're kind of just getting this more of this calcification. You know, that that necessarily isn't my area of expertise, but I think that that's kind of the some of the mechanisms that that might be contributing to that. I also think that, you know, we're kind of just beginning and especially endurance athletes to kind of place a priority on also looking at our diet quality. You know? Of course, like, you know, you always think of endurance genres as, like, being skinny, but it doesn't necessarily mean they eat the best. You know? Maybe they eat a diet that's high in sugar or their cholesterol levels are high. And one of the things I think that we don't know about some of the men in these studies, and we actually do know some things about them is, like, oh, a lot of them were former smokers. We don't really have anything about their diet quality. You know? What was their cholesterol levels? What were their Apo b levels like? And so I think until we know that, you know, I think I would argue that, you know, maybe if your diet is very healthy and you're watching your cholesterol levels or and things like that, maybe you don't get this calcification. Another thing is when do you start exercising? If you start late in life, maybe you still get that calcification. But, like, someone like myself, you know, I I started exercising. I started doing endurance athletics at age 13. So will I have the same outcomes as someone who started doing endurance training when they were 40 years old? I'm not sure. So I think that there's a lot we have to learn about that, and I'm I'm kind of interested to see this this area, evolve as we learn more and more of these studies come out. Yeah. Like, it might be that they got the plaque before they started running from whatever other lifestyle activities. And, you know, it's some one of those tests that you most people don't do it, you know, rarely, maybe, like, once or even most people don't do do it even once. So it's, like, hard to know when did it come there and why did it come there. So it's, yeah, kinda retrospective. Right. And, you know, if you were a smoker from age 20 to 40 and then you decided to stop smoking, start endurance training, you know, I maybe you can't erase the effects of smoking or heavy drinking early in life. I think there's certainly something to be said about that too. And, funny that you mentioned the is the calcification. So I saw one of your publications from a few years ago was on sleep and endothelial functions or sleep deprivation. So that then obviously can also, like, affect that. So if you're not, like, sleeping enough or you're just sleep deprived, then that's also, like, a risk factor for the coronary artery calcification. Yeah. Definitely. We can you know, I think that there's we have to consider the overlapping kind of risk factors. So, certainly, you know, if there's someone who's an endurance athlete and you're also not sleeping well, could that could that kind of combine? Interestingly, though, there have been some studies that, you know, these are all kind of observational studies that they would suggest that if you don't sleep enough, but you get a decent level of exercise during the week, that that kind of counteracts it. So being active can counteract some of the negative effects of not sleeping as well. Now, of course, you know, sleeping well and exercising, that's the best. But then if you're a poor sleeper but you exercise, that's also okay. I don't think getting enough sleep can make up for not exercising. No. So I think somebody who Yeah. Exercises somebody who exercises and doesn't sleep well is going to be better off than someone who sleeps well but doesn't exercise. That's kind of my hypothesis there. But, you know, obviously, you wanna do both of them if if you can. Yeah. Yeah. And at the same time, if the exercise you're already doing too much or and it starts to impede your sleep, then, then you need to sleep more. So it's kind of dependent on the person. Right. At least chronically, I think I'm I'm always posting about this kind of on social media, but, you know, there are times where, you know, say we have a early morning flight or something like that. I will I'm not you know, I'll never hesitate to sacrifice a few hours of sleep if it means I'm gonna get a workout in for that day. Now you can't do that every day, and nor do I think anyone should. I think if I think if you have to do that, you kind of need to reassess your schedule in your life and, you know, how do I make both of these things work. But once or twice a month, there will be a time where I have to say, oh, I could get eight hours of sleep, then I'm going to get six, and I'm going to do a workout versus sleep eight hours and skip my workout. I think that is totally fine if you do that once or twice. And, in fact, I think that, again, there are some actually good experimental studies showing that if you exercise during a period of sleep deprivation, it kind of counteracts the negative effects on endothelial function or mitochondrial function or protein synthesis. So if you are sleep deprived, if you're a clinician and maybe you're doing a night shift or something like that, Exercise before going in, it seems to actually be better, which I think is kind of cool cool data because all of us lose out on sleep every now and then. Nobody's perfect in getting, you know, seven to nine hours of sleep every single night. Right. So let's talk about then the you mentioned this low intensity and high intensity exercise. I guess that's one of the biggest questions people have. So, like, should I do this HIT cardio, or should I do zone two cardio? So, yeah, what's the kind of what did the study say about it? Like, what is more effective in terms of raising VO two max? And, you know, obviously, like we said, the and the answer in the end is gonna be that you need to do both. But, yeah, like, how would you, like, structure the ratios of how much of each? It's that this is obviously one of the kind of main, areas of debate among, you know, physiologists and and exercise scientists and and things like that. So the I think in my mind, you know, I've read most of the literature on, like, what what I haven't read most of the literature, but what most of the literature would say is that, inevitably, high intensity interval training and granted, most of the studies in this area are just going to be eight to twelve weeks long. That's just the nature of studies in exercise science. They're gonna be eight to twelve weeks long. They're not two, three, four, five year long studies. So I'll kind of talk about maybe the implication of that later. But high intensity training is better for improving VO two max, better for improving your fitness kind of in the short term. So if you were to say you take an exercise program where somebody's doing sixty minutes a day of, let's just refer to it as zone two training, three to four days a week, or they're doing high intensity interval training, three to four days a week, but it's only twenty to thirty minutes. They tend to get more fit when they do that high intensity interval training. So, yes, that would say that, oh, well, you should just do high intensity interval training if you're looking to improve your VO two max. Sure. That's kind of what it means. But one of the, caveats with high intensity training is that you can't do it every single day. You know? These studies, they have people doing it for three days per week for, you know, eight to twelve weeks. But and even then, that's a lot. And then after the twelve weeks, they're not they're not continuing to do that. So it's very intense training for a period of twelve weeks. So hit constant hit long term just isn't sustainable. And so you need to find something else that will improve your fitness or at least help, you know, work on that baseline fitness, that doesn't cause the autonomic, stress, the cardiovascular stress that high intensity interval training does. And that's where kind of your lower moderate intensity zone two training comes in. Now it doesn't it doesn't have zero benefits for VO two max, of course. But I just think that, you know, if if we look long term and say, like, you really want to elevate your ceiling while doing just low intensity training isn't going to do that. There are benefits to it. It improves, you know, your fat oxidation. It improves your mitochondrial function. It will improve your, you know, your heart, your cardiac function too. And all of those things are important for elevating your VO two max, but only doing hot aerobic training will not increase your VO two max, whereas unless you're very unfit. I mean, if you take somebody with a very low baseline fitness level, you know, walking could increase their VO two max. So you obviously have to consider someone's baseline fitness. But if you're a relatively fit person, if you just do moderate training, you're probably not going to increase your VO two max much. If you do high intensity training, it will increase it a lot. But what most of us want long term is, you know, something that we can do every week for years and years and years and years. And what that leads us to is a distribution that, involves some low intensity, some moderate intensity training, and then some high intensity interval training. What's up? What the break what the breakdown needs to be, that's, you know, another topic of debate. You'll hear a lot of you'll hear a lot about eighty twenty training, you know, where 80% of your total weekly volume should kind of be in this lower to moderate intensity, and 20% of your training should be high intensity. You know, at a heart rate that is equivalent to a high intensity. I think that that is a good framework if you are kind of leaning more towards endurance activity and your total weekly volume is pretty high. So if you're exercising for eight or more hours per week, I think that that breakdown is is pretty solid. If you're someone who is lifting weights and just supplementing with cardio, say, maybe you're just doing maybe you're doing three days per week, thirty to sixty minutes each time. I think that you could probably skew that distribution a little bit more in favor of a high intensity to kind of help maximize those adaptations. So maybe you're doing, like, seventy thirty or sixty forty. I think that there's something to be said about that. So I think that the lower your total weekly volume is, the you can afford to do a little bit more high intensity training. And, no, this doesn't mean going to the wall every single day and or going to the well every single day and ending your workout feeling like you, you know, you you shouldn't, like, move for the rest of the day because you're so exhausted. I think that there's sort of this the nomenclature is bad with high intensity because it's either, oh, you're either high intensity or you're low intensity. Whereas the reality is there's a lot of intensities in between. You can do threshold training, which is kind of high intensity, but it's not, you know, 80 to 90% of your or 90 to a 100% of your maximal aerobic capacity. It's more like 80%. So you can do a little bit of that too. So there's all of these, you know, intensities that that factor into it. But I do think just kind of what I generally say and what I generally recommend is, you know, if you're doing a lot of volume, that eighty twenty can kind of apply. But if you're really just trying to optimize your fitness and you're doing two to three days per week of cardio, don't be scared maybe to do a little bit more high intensity training than the eighty twenty advocates would kind of say because they're largely relying on observational data with that eighty twenty that comes from athletes doing a lot of volume of exercise, you know, like, twenty to twenty five hours per week, you know, cyclists who are just exercising for four to five hours per day. So those are different than most of us who are not exercising that much. And I guess the reason they do it is because of, yeah, they don't wanna risk injury and they don't wanna overtrain. So they need to rack up the long hours to get the same effects from, for the training. Right. And if you think about it, I mean, even if they're doing 20% of their exercise training per week, if they're doing twenty to twenty five hours per week, that means they're doing four to five hours of high intensity interval training. I mean, most people don't exercise a total of four to five hours in a week, but these people are gonna be doing four hours of just high intensity, but they're doing 20, you know, eighteen to twenty hours of low intensity aerobic training. So, you know, even if you're doing half of your high intensity interval training, but you're doing hundred and fifty minutes per week, you're doing seventy five minutes of high intensity training, which isn't, you know, that much, relatively speaking. Mhmm. Gotcha. And is the another reason I saw that that the the hit intervals tend to do better in the short term studies is because they they, like, burn more calories and you expend more energy doing them. So, like, if you do twenty minute hit session, you burn more calories than doing, like, a sixty minute zone two cardio session, and that's the giving the, like, adaptations because of the higher energy expenditure. Like, is there any, like, truth to that? Yeah. I think so. So the we would consider it kind of like their work match. So their match for, you know, what's your, like, output during the session, whether you measure the output in calories or kilojoules or or whatever. So and the studies typically do that, and they even show that even when they are matched for output. So say say same caloric burn, high intensity training still seems to perform a little bit better than moderate intensity training, but they do equal them out. So sixty minutes of moderate intensity training at a heart rate of 65% is, say, the same caloric burn as forty minutes of high intensity training at 85% of your max, even though it's 40% of you know, or forty minutes versus sixty minutes or even thirty minutes. So less time with high intensity training, but similar caloric burn still leads to cardiovascular adaptations that are superior. So that's kind of one of the benefits why HIIT has kind of been advocated so much is because even when it's work matched to endurance training, low intensity endurance training, it's it's somewhat superior. Again, in the short term of, you know, the eight to twelve weeks. And I guess another problem here might be that, let's see. The average person here is, okay, hits are good. Hit cardio is good. Is it better? So they start doing hit, but they're not actually doing hit. So they're, like because they're not used to, like, they don't know what their 85% of their max heart rate is. So they're, like, doing some somewhere between, like, you know, 75 or maybe even, like, 65 because that's not that's what they're kind of, used to, in terms of, like, the average life. So they think that's, like, okay, I'm doing HIIT, but in reality, they might be doing only, like, zone two or zone three, kind of. Yeah. It takes a while to to kind of learn, you know, what HIIT actually is. Like you said, if if you take someone who's never exercised before and you tell them to go hard, you know, go get on the bike and go as hard as you can, they might only be at 75% of their heart rate. But because they're so undetrained, you know, their muscular system is kind of detrained. So they're gonna they're gonna get that muscle burn, but they might their heart rate might not be that high. So I would certainly, it it takes time to kind of learn that, but then I would certainly recommend that people figure out, you know, or get an idea of what their maximal heart rate is so that they can actually look at it using their watch during exercise to see where you actually are. Because true high intensity interval training, it it should be at 85% or more of your maximal heart rate. And, you know, that's high. It takes a lot to to do that. And as for how to estimate that, you know, you've probably heard of the 220 minus your age is sort of what your age predicted maximum heart rate is. That seems to work. It'll give you a general idea of what your maximal heart rate is, but it's not it doesn't work for everybody. There are very you know, there are individual differences in maximal heart rate and things like that. And so I would recommend, you know, that people do kind of a test to maybe determine what their max heart rate is. Go do a VO two max test or find a protocol to determine their max heart rate because it can be kind of valuable versus just relying on that equation that doesn't always produce the most accurate, estimation of your max heart rate. Yeah. And I guess, you know, sometimes if you're a fitter, then that number might not be that accurate, but it, you know, is a good estimate in the beginning kind of to know that. Yeah. And the fitter you are yeah. I mean, because for instance, just to use an example, I'm 30 years old. And so if I use that equation, two twenty minus my age, my maximum heart rate should be a 190. My real maximum heart rate is only about a 185 to a 186, something like that measured on multiple occasions. So there's no way I'm getting my heart rate to a 190 beats per minute. It's just not that, you know, my I have a low maximal heart rate, low resting heart rate too. So, if I were to try to use that one ninety, it would, you know, be really hard for me to actually get there. But knowing that my heart rate is actually lower because I've actually tested it, you know, it can actually lead you to kind of an accurate zone when you're when you're exercising. So your, like, lower resting heart rate facilitates the lower maximum heart rate? Or not not always. I just think that there are kind of genetic and other factors that come into play for determining max heart rate. I guess sometimes I mean, not always, though. If you if you have a lower resting heart rate, you can still have a high maximum heart rate. I know there are elite athletes with resting heart rates that are, you know, very low similar to mine, but that also maybe have a maximal heart rate of of 200. So it doesn't always mean that, you know, you'll have a low low that both will be low. Gotcha. But when it comes to hit intervals, so, like, how should they structure the what's, like is there any, like, optimal method to do the hits? Like, how long the intervals or how long should they rest between the intervals? Yeah. The thing with the intervals is there are so many variations, and a lot of variations will work for improving VO two max. The the best that we can do is kind of look at what are some of the intervals used in the different studies and how well those work. A common protocol that is used to improve VO two max is the Norwegian four by four protocol, which is essentially you do four rounds of four minutes at 85 to a 100% of your maximal heart rate with three minute recovery in between. So you're gonna do four minutes hard, three minutes easy. Four minutes hard, three minutes easy. Four minutes hard, three minutes easy. Four minutes hard, three minutes easy. So it's a very short workout. The four minute intervals at, you know, 85% plus of your maximal heart rate are certainly not easy. It's doable, but it it hurts pretty bad. And so I think long duration intervals are sir are good for improving VO two max. I would think something two, three, four, five, six minutes. Those are all going to be great. That's not to say that, you know, doing thirty second intervals can't improve your VO two max because sprint interval training where they do fifteen minutes hard, fifteen minutes rest, and they repeat that, you know, fifteen, twenty, 30 times, that can also improve your VO two max. But I would say the longer kind of one to four minute intervals, that will be a pretty good, like, sweet spot for people to target if you're really looking to to optimize that, like, VO two max. When you get to the lower ends, you know, you're gonna be really pushing the power output, and so those are kind of good glycolytic type, intervals. But the longer stuff is going to be good for working that threshold heart rate, kind of pushing that upper ceiling of of VO two max. So the Norwegian four by four, I just mentioned, that's a common protocol used in studies. It's not the magic bullet. It's not the only interval workout that's going to improve your VO two max, but I bring that one up. It's just commonly brought up because it's frequently used, and it seems to be quite effective. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. Like, I think some of the if you do, like, longer in the interval, then that at least some of the meta analysis have found that that's kind of gives more than short intervals. So, like, four minutes and above is better than, like, thirty seconds or less than one minute. Yeah. It does seem to be it does seem to be better than thirty second intervals. So those thirty second intervals are better than, you know, the monitor intensity training, but they're not as good as maybe the four minute intervals. And then if you're going any longer than, say, five minutes, ten minutes plus, then you're just going to be kind of compromising intensity at that point. And so that's probably why those are not as effective. They can be effective for improving your VO two max, but, you know, if you're doing a ten minute interval Mhmm. It's gonna be hard to maintain your 85 to 90 heart rate for that long, and you're just going to risk getting fatigued and not really the quality of the intervals is going to suffer. Yeah. Like, at that point, you're not really going as fast as you think you are. Right. Right. Exactly. Yeah. People right. People you know, the you'll get people saying like, oh, well, you should go do a go do a one minute sprint. Well, I'm like, well, nobody's sprinting for a minute. You can't sprint for a minute. You might feel like you are, but that a sprint is your maximum intensity, and you can't nobody can really do that for, for a minute. Yeah. I mean, the first ten seconds, you sprint, and then after that, you slowly slow down. And, Yeah. Exactly. Have you ever, do you have you heard of a Wingate test? Yeah. Have you ever taken one? No. Okay. So that's kind of a similar thing. Essentially, it's like you pedal as fast as you can and then on a bicycle and then a weight drops. And so you pedal against this resistance for it's only thirty seconds long, but you just see, you know, for the first five seconds, your power output is up here, and then it just goes down every second until thirty seconds. So it's like you really realize that you only have two to three seconds of your ATP PCR system energy stores, and then you just start to to fatigue, like, rapidly after that because your body just can't produce energy that fast. Right. What about the so, like, if someone is doing the long training, so low intensity training zone two, so how what's, so, like, is is it, like, the more you do it, the better, or is there any also, like, optimal amount of, doing it? I think you will get people saying more the better, and I would I would probably be one of those people. I mean, you know, everyone has time constraints and, you know, depending on your previous training history or your level of fitness, you know, you're only going to be able to handle so much volume in a week. But I think that for zone two training, three hundred minutes a week, so five hours would be a great target for some people. I know that that seems like a lot, especially if people are doing resistance training and everything else that they have to do. But I think that there's solid evidence that if you do three hundred minutes per week, that that would be a great goal. As for then the lower intensity training, so zone two is gonna be something like 60 to 70%. So that's still somewhat hard. It's not easy training by any means, but it's it's not intense training. I would say for something though, like less than 50% of your heart rate, so maybe a brisk walk, Just do as much of that as you possibly can. I mean, movement like that is just going to be good and really will not risk overtraining, injury, anything like that. I mean, doing a very easy pedal on a bicycle or going out for a walk, those aren't going to raise your injury risk nor are they really going to, you know, increase your risk of, say, burning out or overtraining, however you wanna say it. Those provide really a low risk for that. So there's a lot of benefit to just, like, volume wise, doing as much of that stuff as you can. And, yeah, like any you know, you can do it on a bike, you can do it while running, the rowing machine. Like, any anything is pretty much good to go? Yeah. I would say so. I'm a big fan of the bike for low intensity training. I'm a runner, but I like to do when I go out for a run, I like to maybe increase the pace a little bit more, because I think I find that running slow, your biomechanics change a lot, so it can kind of feel awkward. I like the I like how it feels to run fast. My body, like, feels good. And then on the bike, whether you're going slow or fast, your biomechanics are kind of the same, so you're not going to change. So I'm a fan of using the bike for low intensity training, but, yeah, any anything we'll do, biking, running, walking, rowing machine, elliptical, whatever you like to do best. Gotcha. What do you say about people saying that, you know, running is gonna wreck your knees or that, too much, you know, whatever cardio or any other this low intensity training is gonna, like, lead to some form of injury. Yeah. I mean, there's certainly something to be said about, you know, if you increase your volume or intensity too much, that risking injury. The whole, running is bad for your knees thing has been debunked kind of several times. Meta analyses show that people who run have lower rates of knee osteoarthritis than people who don't do any exercise. So, I mean, being overweight, being sedentary, that's the worst thing that you can do to increase your osteoarthritis risk. Running seems to actually be protective against knee osteoarthritis. So that, you know, the whole that whole thing is definitely kind of been debunked. But, obviously, you know, if you if you train a lot, you're gonna you can increase your risk for certain injuries. And I think that you just have to be safe about not sharply increasing your volume, just, you know, increase. There's kind of a rule out there. I don't necessarily follow it myself, but it can be good for people to use. Just increase your whether it's volume and time or your mileage or your kilometers, in running, like, 10% per week. I think that that's a solid strategy. So it allows you to not increase too fast and risk injury. But overall, I mean, I think that just like there's no argument that being sedentary is far worse than exercising. Sure. There are some people who overdo it. I overdo it plenty of times to get myself hurt, but overall, the outcomes for people who exercise are going to be better, and very few people are exercising too much where they need to worry about, oh my gosh. I really need to limit how much exercise that I'm doing. Right. Yeah. And I guess the form also matters. So you need to, like, learn the form a little bit to not, like, heel strike or Yeah. Form is important. Shoes are kind of important too. I think that in the last five years, we've really seen and this is specific to running, obviously, but we've seen this proliferation of the the super shoes. So, you know, the Nike, they have the Alphafly, and now every company every running shoe company has some sort of shoe with a carbon fiber plate or a super shoe. And a lot of people are wearing these super shoes. But Mhmm. One of the things that is not talked about a lot is how they really change your biomechanics of running even for elite athletes. And they're designed to be run fast in. If you've ever put these shoes on and just done like a jog, it feels very awkward. And the more the faster that you run, the better that they feel. But I'll go out, to do a trail run or run around the town, and and I'll see people just doing their general training runs in these shoes. And I don't have data for this. I'm not a orthopedic, you know, surgeon or a physical therapist, but I think that they're probably contributing to a slightly higher risk of injuries among people who, like you said, haven't really worked on their running form, or really considered it. And then they just put on these shoes and think that they're going to just help them run faster, but they could actually lead to injuries because of how they change, the way you run. Mhmm. Gotcha. One thing I wanna talk more was, as well is the idea of nutrition. So, like, do certain foods help you to increase your VO two max, or are there any foods that decrease it? So what's the data about that? Yeah. Interesting. I can't say that there are any foods that would increase your VO two max. There are a few supplements that I won't say they would the only way to actually, you know, increase your true VO two max is to is to exercise more. But there are actually a few supplements that have kind of shown might increase or decrease VO two max when you combine them with training. One of those supplements is nitrates or beet root juice. So there is ton of literature on beet root juice showing that it is a performance enhancer. Mostly, though, unfortunately, I guess, in in, like, older people or people with heart failure, it really seems to help their exercise performance. But I think that there are some studies in trained populations endurance athletes showing that beetroot juice can help improve, like, your VO two max. And why that occurs is because it it allows you to deliver more oxygen to, your skeletal muscle and your mitochondria because beetroot juice contains nitrates, which get converted into nitric oxide. Nitric oxide vasodilates blood vessels and allows for a greater delivery of blood flow. So people can supplement with nitrates, beet root juice, that seems to have a beneficial effect, if you combine that too with, like, your training. So take it before training, take it after training, supplementing it with a few weeks. That might actually be able to increase your VO two max, which is kind of, interesting. There's not really much else that that I'm aware of. No, like, foods that you can eat to to increase it. Interestingly, creatine, which is a hot supplement these days, I have taken it myself. A lot of people are are starting to take it. There's actually one study that showed supplementing with creatine might actually reduce your VO two max. So there was a study of endurance runners. Half of them supplemented with creatine, half of them didn't. At the end of the study, they're also training during this study. And I'm not sure how long it was. I kinda forget the duration of that study. But at the end of the study, the, group who supplemented with creatine actually had a lower VO two max than the group who didn't. And some of that was due to the fact that the group who supplemented with creatine gained weight. That's one of the side effects, quote, side effects of creatine. It tends to promote water retention, and you might gain a little a little weight, maybe a little bit of extra muscle. But that would reduce your relative VO2 max because that's expressed to body weight. So if I don't get any fitter but I gain weight, my VO2 max is actually going to go down because my body weight is higher. So I don't I don't think that you should be concerned about that. If you're taking creatine, don't to say that it's going to lower your view two max, but, just kind of one of the studies that I think is is kind of interesting to point out showing that it actually decreases rather than increases at which we might expect. Yeah. I've seen that study as well. And, yeah, probably maybe just the muscle mass or the water retention, that occurs. But it does, like you know, because, I mean, I would imagine bodybuilders, they don't necessarily have, like, a super high Vio to max. Maybe because of not training it or not doing cardio, but is, like, is too much muscle counterproductive for the VO two max? Well, if you yeah. I mean, if you increase your muscle, you're going to increase your absolute VO two max just because more muscle needs more oxygen. And so your VO two your VO two will increase. But at the risk of, yes, you know, if you're an endurance athlete, say, and you put on five to 10 pounds of muscle, that I don't think would necessarily be beneficial because your your relative VO two max will go down. You're gonna be, like, less efficient because you you weigh more. But I definitely think that there is a point of, you know, if you add one to two pounds of muscle and your VO two max is already pretty high, then that muscle probably benefits you more than one to two points in VO two max. If I gained five pounds of muscle, I think if, if my VO two max would go down a little bit, but I think that that muscle would benefit me more than that VO two max would because it's already high enough that it's not gonna dip below something that's going to, like, decrease my, performance. Gotcha. Right. And from a longevity perspective as well, that you need a kind of a balance of both to a certain extent. Exactly. Yeah. For sure. So, there's always that that argument. Like, so, sure, you want to get your VO to max as high as possible, but if all you're doing is endurance training, then you're gonna sacrifice some muscle. So, like, what's the balance of how do I maximize my VOG max, but how do I also kind of maximize muscle mass by training both of those systems? Yeah. It's, it's interesting because you don't wanna neglect one for the other. Same goes for strength training. Yes. You wanna maximize muscle mass, but I think that there is probably a threshold above which more muscle isn't beneficial. Same probably goes for VO two max. You know? I mean, if you go from 75 to 80, I'm not sure that that will help you live longer. You know? So I there's, you know, there's a there's a threshold for everything where the benefits start to to level off. Yeah. Like, what I've seen is that the 50 is the highest threshold for the longevity side, but that might be because no one has researched what's, you know, higher in that. What they do find that the Olympic athletes still live longer than the general population, so, like, five years longer than the general population. And they probably have a higher VO2 max to hold than, like, 50. They have, like, maybe in their sixties and seventies. So yeah. Have you have you seen anything any studies about, like, what's what's the, like, the highest VO2 max linked to the lowest mortality? Yeah. I don't think we we know that yet. You know, the the one study that is kind of shown to have the there's no upper limit to the VO two max, though, the highest VO two max in that study was, I think, around, like, 55, maybe even 60. So I think that right now, we'd be able to say something like that is probably where the plateau occurs. But, the data on the Olympians and then there was that recent study that came out in the they studied, I think it was around 300. So the, the first 300 men took or 200 men to break four minutes in the mile, they studied them and found that they lived, like, four to five years longer than men of the general population. And, obviously, if you're a sub four minute miler, you probably have a few two max in the seventies at least, you know, 70 to 80. So I'm not sure that going up that high keeps, you know, returning those benefits, but, I think that it might, but I think we need to learn more. So right now, I think that the the kind of threshold would be somewhere around that 55 to 60. 60 is like, if you get it up to there, you're going to further reduce your, you know, lifespan and health span, above somebody out of 55. But whether, like, 60 to 65 improves it, I'm not quite sure. I think we need maybe a little more data on that. Yeah. I would hypothesize. I would speculate it's probably a bit higher, maybe even up to 70. But then once you hit that 70, maybe, you know, possibly not. Right. Yeah. Alright. Well, it's been great talking with you and, discussing these topics. Before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and your work? I am primarily active on x where I post a lot about research. I post some stuff on my personal life. Any content that I create goes on there. My username is, b, the letter b, underscore Holmer, h o l m e r. And other than that, I, post most of my content on Substack. The Substack is called Physiologically Speaking, and you can just go to physiologicallyspeaking.com, and that will take you to my Substack. I do a weekly newsletter on there where I post about often, you know, things like DO2 max, what we were talking about today. But any study that I read during the week that I find is kind of impactful, it might relate to diet. It might relate to nutrition. It might relate to exercise or heart health, sleep. I summarize that. It's a fairly lengthy, not too long, but, you know, it's a it's a good breakdown of the study, some background. And so I post on there at least once a week. Sometimes I post more, but, yeah, that's that's mainly where people can find me. Subscribe to my newsletter, and, you know, you'll you'll get anything I post on there. I won't spam you too much, though. Don't worry about that. Sounds good. And, my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you adopted sooner? Yeah. I it's funny. I was asked this on another podcast, and I think that my, my answer probably wasn't what most people would expect, but it was walking. I, like, recently have only started to walk for the sake of just walking probably in the last, like, four to five years. But I have just found that not necessarily for improving my fitness, but I just think that it's a way to reduce how much time I'm sitting, which I think is good. Even though I'm very physically active, do a lot of exercise during the week, sitting less is beneficial, I think, for everyone. But it's also just, I think, a way to to kind of de stress, listen to an audiobook, listen to a podcast, get outside, get sun. It's provided immense benefits just to my life overall even with helping recovery from exercise. So I try to walk for at least an hour a day in addition to whatever exercise I'm doing. And I just wish I would have discovered it earlier. I mean, when I was younger, you know, in my twenties and things like that, I just I never thought about the idea of, like, going for a walk. It was always just, I'd rather just, like, stay inside and sit on the couch, but, now I really do try to be deliberate about walks. I try to walk after, like, every meal. I found that to be kind of beneficial just for promoting digestion, blood glucose, and things like that. So that's just a habit that I've adopted, recently that I, am very happy I did. Mhmm. Yeah. That's very, good advice. I, yeah, like, think as well that walking is pretty underrated. And, Certainly. You're not gonna, like, increase your year to max with it, at least most people won't. But, yeah, you're just getting this low intensity and, low, like, impact, movement as well that we are just, you know, need pretty much as much as we we can, fit into our day. Yeah. Definitely. I mean, I think we, I think we kind of evolved not necessarily to exercise like we do, but to just walk a lot, a ton of low intensity activity. I mean, if you look at the studies from the anthropologists and the people studying, you know, the whether it's hunter gatherer cultures or even, like, you know, chimpanzees, they just do a lot of maybe not chimpanzees. They kind of sit all day, but hunter gatherer populations are just walking, doing low intensity activity all day long. You know, they're not sitting a ton. So I think that's what our body likes to do. Exercise is obviously great for us, but, just doing as much walking and all that low intensity activity is is great, not just for the body, but I think, for the brain too, for sure. Mhmm. Yeah. Well, it's been great talking with you and, yeah, super interesting for me, and I think the listeners as well are gonna enjoy everything about the VO two Max. Yeah. I hope so. And, I appreciate you having me on the podcast, Seem. I, I enjoy your content a lot. You know, I I started following you on Twitter, but, you know, your YouTube is great. I think you're spreading a lot of interesting information, and so I, appreciate you having me on as a guest. Yeah. I will. I'll see you around. Great. Sounds good. Alright. That's it for this episode. If you liked it, then make sure you subscribe and follow us on social media. You can also preorder my new book, The Longevity Leap, at thelongevityleap.com.