Do my own version of intermittent fasting that I'm gonna share with you. Combined with exercise and other lifestyle habits I'm in the best health and shape of my life. In this video I'm going to share with you what I eat and I'll share my recent blog work in the end. Also, you have to watch until the end because the actual meal is gonna be for the dinner. It's showtime. So the first thing I always have in the morning is a cup of tea. This is like a cinnamon, ginger, cardamom tea. So it's kind of this a little bit of spicier tea, and it's a nice way to, wake up. So right now, it's 8AM what the clock says, but today is the daylight savings day, so it's actually 7AM in the previous day. But, yeah, I'm just starting to write, and I'm gonna be doing that for the next three to four hours pretty much. This is what I've been doing for the last seven to eight months, writing my book, The Longevity Leap. And, yeah, it's, you know, it's the biggest book I've ever written. It's the most comprehensive ones, the most evidence based one. It's got the most references. It's got eight over 8,000 references to different studies and meta analysis and those kind of things. And, yeah, I've been just every day working at it for, you know, six hours on average for the last eight months of literally pure writing or researching and that kind of thing. So, yeah, I'm super excited about it, super proud of it, and, yeah, we'll we'll give more updates when it's gonna come out soon. But, yeah, I'm just gonna drink some of this coffee and, yeah, just be in the zone working or listening to music at the same time, and, yeah, I'm getting it done. Alright. So it's twelve. I'm going to break my fast with, the protein shake that I have every day. I'm gonna share you the recipe, but first I'll take a like a few supplements as well with the food. This is Astaxanthin, Hyaluronic Acid, and the TMG plus the seed probiotic. I'm doing this one as well in the short term, but, these I'll be taking with the food. Take like a scoop of whey protein. This is my pre workout, so I'll be always having this before my workout just to get a better workout. So ten grams of collagen peptides every day pretty much. Plus, I'll also add this sea buckthorn powder, which is, you know, it's a good source of antioxidants and carotenoids. So higher plasma carotenoid levels linked to lower all cosmetallity, just a very healthy berry powder like that, you know, sometimes it's blueberry, sometimes it's cranberry, this time it's sea buckthorn. And the last ingredient for the flavor plus also the porphyllos and, lowering of blood pressure effects, I'll just add this raw cacao, which also has some of these medicinal mushrooms like lion's mane and chaga. I don't have any specific amounts. I'm just putting as much as I kind of feel like. And lastly, I'll also eat like a little bit of carrot as a snack. Apollo, he takes the carrot text every day, he likes raw carrots as well, it's one of his favorite. And, then I'll add just a few cubes for of, ice. It's gonna make it a bit thicker and, more like more like a smoothie kind of texture. Shake it up a little bit so that the powder doesn't get stuck. And then we'll just do the NutriBullet. So it looks very creamy, milky. It's very froth and tastes like a milkshake almost. You can add anything you like. You can add, like, some other sweetener or some berries, fruit, or something like that. In total, this is about 250 calories, maybe at the most, probably 200. It got 30 grams of protein plus 10 grams of collagen, so it's a perfect pre workout plus the daily, you know, collagen, supplementation that's gonna be just good for the my goals, if that makes sense, which are, yeah, physical fitness and and aging plus I'll just take the supplements and that's it. I'll be going to the gym in an hour or two. Alright. So cooking dinner, we have some broccoli, some cored or, like, white wish, and this is 600 grams of sweet potatoes, which I'm just gonna bake in the oven. I just added a little bit of salt, nothing else, and it's gonna be it's gonna be more like baked, or oven baked potatoes pretty much. I'm also gonna be eating the plant based pea protein that, my company is making, and it's a 100% pretty much whole foods. The only ingredients are water, pea protein, salt, some herbs, and vinegar, and, olive oil. So this is, yeah, pretty much the cleanest plant based protein, in the world, the super high protein as well. This entire batch here is 500 grams. I'm not gonna eat the entire thing. A 100 grams of this has 20 grams of protein, so it's pretty high. And I'm gonna probably eat, like, half. So I'll be getting, like, 50 grams of protein, from this much, something like that. So, yeah, super tasty, super high protein, lower in calories, and, pretty filling as well. Higher in fiber as well, so it's got the pea protein that's has some, fiber. Say something. One three. One two three. This is the 250 grams of the pea protein Ghana. It's got 50 grams of protein from here, which is you know super high. It also has a lot little bit of fiber, low carb, low fat, pretty low calories as well, higher protein. Then you have red onions, beetroot, some broccoli, this is some salad mix. I got it has tomatoes, quinoa, bell peppers, some sort of other herbs I guess and, chickpeas, yeah, and lentils and a little piece of, the white fish which is like maybe 10 grams of protein. That's cold. Okay, cold. So it's in total it's about 65 grams of protein or something like that. And the sweet potato, 600 grams of sweet potatoes for the carbs and this is unsweetened iced tea. I'm also gonna add this kind of more, I don't know, different special virgin olive oil and it tastes more bitter than a regular olive oil, which is a good thing. It has like more polyphenols and I also have a little bit of balsamic vinegar for the taste and a real proper gourmet style dinner. Alright. So this is the, let's say, second part of the meal or dessert. I'm having casein protein. I have some walnuts and some cacao nibs here. Just put this is like very tasty, super simple, super healthy dessert, so I got just one scoop of casein. I'm gonna put a little bit more because I worked out today, so like half a quarter scoop. And here I have this is like, almost like a kefir or sour milk type of drink. Yes. Pretty much kefir or, like, unflavored yogurt. And, I'm gonna, you know, have add a little bit, then I'm just gonna mix it. So the protein powder, it becomes chocolate kefir, pretty much. So fermented dairy, super good. Looks like yogurt, chocolate yogurt, but tastes like one of the things I had when I was a child. So this here is probably again at least 30 grams of protein and, yeah, it's a nice final kind of dessert as well to top up my protein intake for the day. So in total, the first meal, the protein shake, 30 grams of protein plus 10 grams of collagen. Then the second meal, the main course, that was 65 grams of protein. So that's, you know, a 100 grams of 95 plus 10 grams of collagen. And this is, again, like 30 grams of protein. And, in total, I'll be getting, you know, a 130 grams of protein plus 10 grams of collagen. This is nice. The walnuts make it a little bit crunchy. Chocolate chocolate kefir or chocolate chocolate. It looks actually looks very chocolatey now. So pretty you can add berries, you can add whatever. Tastes are super nice. Here are the total macros for the day, roughly 21 to 2,200 calories, a 140 grams of protein plus 10 grams of collagen, a 150 grams of carbs, 50 to 60 grams fat. This is what a typical day of eating looks like for me. I might change some of the food groups but the main structure is still the same. Let's just look at my recent blood work done in February. So pretty much everything is optimal. My blood sugar levels is optimal. Hemoglobin a1c five with LDL below 100, HDL 62, triglycerides 53. My lipids ApoB 77, inflammation 0.2. Kidney health is also, very good. My VA to max is 66 milliliters per kilogram per minute which is in the elite category of 18 year olds and my appendicular lean mass index is eight point nine which puts me in the ninetieth percentile of people in terms of muscle mass in my age group. I'm happy to announce that my upcoming book, The Longevity Leap, will be published before summer twenty twenty four. So if you're watching this from the future, then you will probably be able to get access to it in Amazon. If you're watching it right now, then you can join the waiting list, the updates list at, www.longevityleap.com where you will also get after the book has launched, you will also get the free bonus chapter that goes into the details of all my routines with diet exercise supplements and other things. Other than that, thanks for watching this video, make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well, my name is Seem, stay optimized, stay empowered.