The newest diet trend is the sugar diet. Pure sugar, zero fat, trace protein from whatever's in the fruit you're eating is gonna get you ripped. The sugar fasting is honey, maple syrup, sugar, candy, fruit, and fruit juice. Basically, you eat zero protein, zero starch, and zero fat during the day from things like fruit, berries, honey, and even jelly beans and gummy bears. Then in the evening, you eat starchy carbs, lean proteins, vegetables, and low amounts of fat. It sounds very unorthodox and kind of like a fad diet, but a lot of people are reporting that it helps with weight loss by increasing their metabolic rate. In this video, I'm going to look at the science behind the sugar diet, if there is any, and I'll share my own opinions and thoughts about it. The short overview of why the sugar diet works is this. Protein restriction increases metabolic rate and insulin sensitivity. Eating carbohydrates and sugar can also increase your metabolic rate. If you eat carbohydrates and sugar without added fats, your body produces more insulin and it improves insulin sensitivity. On the sugar diet, you get a short term increase in metabolic rate that then can help with weight loss. But a high sugar diet may have other side effects even if you do lose weight, such as dental pack, skin aging, or a higher risk of neurodegeneration later in life. Now there is a catch that almost everyone seems to miss. It's that you can achieve the same effects of the sugar diet by restricting only one single amino acid that I'm gonna talk about. Let me explain. When you restrict protein, you elevate the hormone called f g f 21 or fibroblast growth factor 21, which plays a role in nutrient sensing and metabolic pathways. Protein restriction in lean men has been seen to increase f g f 21 levels and increase energy expenditure to maintain body weight. When lean men ate only 0.83 grams per kilogram of protein per day, which is around 0.4 grams per pound, they required about 20% more calories to maintain their body weight. FGF 21 levels increased 200 to 361% in the plasma during this period. FGF 21 increases metabolic rate through mitochondrial uncoupling, which means wasting energy as heat as well as thermogenesis through increased brown fat expression. This is why f g f 21 is investigated as a therapeutic option for metabolic diseases and obesity. It's also seen that f g f 21 mediates the lifespan extension effects of protein restriction in mice. Protein restriction has been seen to extend the lifespan of mice. And the key amino acid that mediates those effects is methionine. Methionine is the most abundant amino acid in our diet that you get mostly from animal proteins. Methionine restriction has also been seen to improve incidence, resistivity, liver fat, and metabolic health in human clinical trials. It looks like f g f 21 mediates a lot of the effects of methionine restriction on insulin sensitivity and increased energy expenditure, but not liver fat loss. Essentially, when you're eating a very low protein diet, 0.8 grams per kilogram or around 0.4 grams per pound, which is quite low. For me who weighs eighty two kilograms, it will be only 65 grams of protein. That's less than half of what I eat right now. You would increase this hormone FGF 21 that increases your metabolic rate. However, the key for expressing FGF 21 is methionine and sulfur restriction. These amino acids you get mostly from animal proteins such as meat, fish, eggs, dairy. In animal lifespan studies, methionine has no effect on longevity if there is enough glycine present. Glycine supplementation mimics methionine restriction and prevents the harmful side effects of excessive methionine intake. Plant proteins are also low in methionine as well as sulfur, which means that if you were to be eating more plant proteins and low or no animal proteins, you would also enable f g f 21 expression without necessarily restricting protein. If you were to also increase your glycine intake through supplementation, it would mimic methionine restriction fully. Now this scenario wouldn't mimic the sugar diet completely because there's also the component of increased sugar and carbohydrate intake that has a beneficial effect on your thyroid function, but the protein restriction or mimicking methionine restriction with increased glycine intake can increase f g f 21 expression. In rat and mouse studies, methionine restriction leads to visceral fat loss even without calorie restriction. There are human studies showing that methionine and sulfur restriction leads to visceral fat loss around the liver and organs. I personally saw a significant drop in my visceral fat from 350 grams to 54 grams by reducing my methionine intake and increasing my glycine intake without reducing my calorie intake. So the takeaway is that the sugar diet works mostly through protein restriction, specifically methionine restriction. But you don't necessarily need to follow a sugar diet to achieve that. You can achieve some similar effects by restricting methionine and increasing your glycine intake. There's also research that a ketogenic diet activates f g f 21, but an actual ketogenic diet is protein restricted and restricted in methionine to a certain degree. My main thoughts and opinions about the sugar diet is that it works very well in the short term by increasing your metabolic rate and through the calorie restriction. The protein restriction plus the increased carbohydrate intake, yes, it will ramp up your thyroid function and metabolic rate which creates a calorie restricted state that makes you lose weight. There's no way around the thermodynamics of the situation, but we don't have any long term data about the long term health effects. High sugar intake promotes dental plaque and cavities, especially if you're not getting enough fat soluble vitamins, which you get mostly from protein sources and fats. High sugar sources are also very poor sources of micronutrients, which can increase the risk of nutrient deficiencies in the long term. There is a correlation between dental plaque and the risk of heart disease and neurodegeneration, which could be a risk in consuming massive amounts of sugar a day. Elevated f g f 21 levels are associated with an increased incidence of cardiovascular disease, but f g f 21 also has cardiac protective roles. So it's not the case that protein restriction would cause heart disease via f g f 21, but we don't know the long term implications of chronically elevated f g f 21. High sugar intake can accelerate skin aging through the formation of advanced glycation end products. Even when you're not eating anything else with the sugar, the high levels of glucose and fructose can interact with the collagen and elastin producing AGEs that promote skin aging. On a regular diet where consuming normal amounts of fructose and glucose is not gonna be a problem. But if you're consuming hundreds of grams of sugar, it probably has an effect on AGE formation. Eating large amounts of sugar might not be suitable for people with severe insulin resistance and diabetes at least in the short term. Lean and otherwise healthy individuals would generally be fine with a low fat high sugar diet. At the end of the day, the question is why not just follow a regular diet? What about just eating a little bit less? I understand that dieting can be difficult for a lot of people and it's challenging for some individuals. However, there's nothing about the sugar diet that you couldn't achieve with a regular good old calorie restricted diet. Here's what I do to stay lean year round without any problems. I eat 1.6 grams per kilogram of protein a day. That's about a 120 to 130 grams of protein per day. I do supplement around ten to fifteen grams of glycine a day to mimic methionine restriction, and I think it's working. About 70 to 80 grams of fat and about 300 grams of carbs a day. If I want to lose weight, I eat 500 calories less. And if I'm gaining muscle, I eat about 200 calories more. I don't count calories. I don't weigh my food, but this is the general distribution of my macros. I do follow a slightly lower methionine intake because I think it has benefits for longevity, but I definitely am not on a zero methionine intake. The way I get around it is by supplementing glycine and adding an extra 10 to 15 grams of glycine to my diet. After all, my resting metabolic rate based on the metabolic rate test is 3,300, which indicates that something in my diet is increasing my metabolic rate. And I think it is the methionine restriction through glycine supplementation. At the end of the day you have to think about what's your goal with your diet. Is it just weight loss or is it something else? I personally follow a diet plan that's beneficial for longevity based on the available evidence. Check out my video breaking it down next.