When you picture the longest living people in the world, you probably imagine a perfect lifestyle. No junk food, no alcohol, no smoking, and long walks in the park every morning. But here's the surprising truth. Most centenarians don't live quote unquote optimized lives at all. Most of them eat the same foods as their neighbors, some drink whiskey, some eat ice cream, and yet they outlive almost everyone. In ice cream, I eat ice cream every night. It makes me happy. So what's really going on? Is it genetics or just luck? In this video, I'll look at the science why some people live over the age of 100 and beyond. We'll discuss the role of genetics, health span, and even real world examples of people who've defied the odds. I wanna start off with one of the more common arguments people say when it comes to longevity. My grandpa smoked a pack of cigarettes every day and he still lived to the age of 100. We've all heard about the smoking grandpa or smoking aunt who just doesn't take care of their health at all. They're a bit fat, they smoke, they drink, and they live to the age of 110. After all, John Coment, the longest living person in history, smoked until the age of 117. This is just called anecdotal evidence, and you can always find exceptions to the rule. But when it comes to most people, what does the science actually say? This 2004 study looked at all of the centenarians in Rome, Italy, and they found that eighty three point eight percent had never smoked, thirteen point five percent were former smokers, and only two point seven percent were active smokers. Smokers were mostly males and they did have more chronic diseases after the age of 65 so they were sicker because of the smoking. This directly contradicts the idea that smoking somehow is beneficial to longevity as only two point seven percent of the centenarians were current smokers and eighty three point eight percent never smoked. It means that there are always going to be extreme examples of people breaking the rules and still living very long. It doesn't mean that breaking the rules itself was the reason they lived so long in the first place. What about other blue zones like Sardinia? This 2022 study found that only one percent of the Sardinian elders aged 89 to 101 were active smokers. Although forty eight percent of them were past smokers. In Ikaria, Greece, seven percent were active smokers. So the vast majority of centenarians in the blue zones don't smoke. Keep in mind that the likelihood of reaching the age of 100 is already so small compared to the general population. And everyone who reaches the age of 100 has good genetics or at least somewhat decent genetics to begin with. Let's do some math. In 2004, there were 2,500,000 people in Rome out of whom a 157 were centenarians. That's zero point zero zero six two percent of the population of Rome being over the age 100 in the year 2004. Only two point seven percent of those people were smokers. So out of all people in Rome, zero point zero zero zero one seven percent were a 100 year old smokers. This means that if you smoke, the likelihood of you reaching the age of 100 is 0.00001. The odds are heavily stacked against your favor. Yes. There are very extreme cases, minority of cases who reach the age of 100 while smoking. But for every smoker that reaches the age of 100, there are tens of millions of people who smoke and die in their sixties or seventies. And the reason these smokers can live to the age of 100 while smoking is because of genetics. Genetics is way more powerful than people think. A 2004 study on 295 centenarian offspring found they had sixty two percent lower risk of all cause mortality, seventy one percent lower risk of cancer specific mortality, and eighty five percent lower risk of coronary heart disease mortality. Their biological age was also lower than their peers. This means that if you have parents or grandparents who live to the age of 100, then you have a significantly lower risk of dying yourself and you have a significantly lower risk of developing chronic diseases. And the reason for that is genetics. Longevity passes down through families through genetics. Another 2008 study found that the offspring of centenarians had a seventy eight percent lower risk of myocardial infarction, eighty three percent lower risk of stroke, eighty six percent lower risk of diabetes, and eighty one percent lower risk of death compared to age matched controls. The centenarian offspring start healthier and they stay healthier for longer. They have a genetic advantage. This doesn't apply to just parents. Being the sibling of a male nonagenarian increases your likelihood of living to 90 by 1.73 times, While having both a male and female siblings who survive until the age of 105 increases your chance of living to 105 by 35.6 times compared to the general population. If you have brothers and sisters who live to the age of 100, you're 35 times more likely to also live to the age of 100 compared to other people. When it comes to John Calment, the longest living person in history who lived to the age of 122, she had extremely good genetics, one in a billion genetics. A 2020 study that analyzed John's genealogical tree discovered that her ancestors were all living 10% longer on average each generation, outperforming her peers by seven to 43%. John was just born at a time modern enough where medicine and improved living standards enabled her to live 80% longer than her peers. John's offspring and great great grandchildren would be expected to live beyond a 120 and a 130 because medicine keeps getting better in keeping people alive for longer. Longevity runs in families, that's all there is to say. If you have long living parents and long living grandparents, you're by default going to live longer than people who don't have long living parents. What specific genes are we talking about? Well, there are thousands of genes that influence longevity in some shape or form, we don't understand all of them. However, there are a few established genes that we know affect longevity. FOXO three a is a gene related to stress resilience. People who live longer have a higher prevalence of FOXO three a, which makes them more resilient against stress and with a stronger immune system. They basically suffer fewer consequences from stress. Exercise, calorie restriction, and intermittent fasting increase FOXO three a expression and stress resilience. Interestingly, calorie restriction is the most powerful intervention seen to extend lifespan in animals. ApoE two alleles reduce the risk of Alzheimer's and heart disease. The apoE four allele increases the risk of Alzheimer's and heart disease. ApoE three allele is normal and doesn't increase or decrease risk. Most people have e three whereas a minority of people have e two and slightly more people have e four. You can have two alleles and people with two e two alleles have significantly greater longevity not to mention a lower risk of heart disease and dementia. However, people with e four alleles have a higher risk of Alzheimer's, heart disease, and overall mortality. People in Sardinia and Okinawa have a lot more apo e two alleles than e four alleles. Having an e four allele doesn't mean you're going to get heart disease or dementia. It just means you have a genetically high risk. People with the e four allele can mitigate their risk by improving their sleep quality and eating a diet low in saturated fats and higher in polyphenolic compounds, which have been shown to reduce the risk of e four on the risk of dementia. IGF one also predicts longevity in centenarians with the longest living people exhibiting lower IGF one levels. IGF one is a hormone of growth that increases growth and body mass. Centenarians are typically shorter, lower body weight, and smaller in size because of their lower IGF one levels, which lowers the risk of cancer and overall mortality. Things that raise IGF one are diabetes, metabolic syndrome, obesity, and eating around the clock, especially high carb, high protein meals. You can lower IGF one with calorie restriction, intermittent fasting, and reducing protein or carbohydrate intake. Centenarian blood work itself tends to be quite good. They have lower biological age scores and better blood markers, which is the reason they get chronic diseases later in life. This is the reason centenarians get chronic diseases ten to twenty years later than the average person. They die to the same diseases such as heart disease or cancer but they get the diseases significantly later which enables them to live longer. What it means in practice is that centenarians live so long because they stay healthier for longer and they get the chronic diseases later in life. A longer health span has been seen to predict a longer lifespan among centenarians. A 2008 study in the Journal of Gerontology examined supercentenarians in Okinawa and discovered that most of them had minimal clinical diseases, and most of them were functionally independent in their activities of daily living. An amazing example of a very long hell span is the longest living man in history. Jiroumen Kimura from Japan who died at the age of 116. They actually did quite a comprehensive study and blood work analysis on Jiroumen published in 2022. What they found was that Jiroumen was free from all chronic disease until the last year of his death. He had no cardiometabolic risk factors throughout his life such as elevated blood sugar, high cholesterol, or high inflammation. However, at the age of 111, he had high cystatin c levels which suggests kidney disease. Then within the last few months of his life, he had three consecutive heart failures that ended up killing him. Let's take a look at his blood work. His cholesterol was excellent, a 148 at the age of 111 and a 155 at the age of a 115. LDL was also quite low in the seventies and low eighties. HDL nice and high in the sixties. Triglycerides could be slightly better like below 50, but for someone who's a 111 years old, it's excellent. Blood urea nitrogen is slightly high. Ideally, it would be below 20, but this is a sign of kidney disease. And we know Jerome had kidney disease. His albumin is too low probably due to malnourishment and not being able to eat enough food which is normal for his age. Malnutrition is a huge cause of death for elderly people. Jerome's CRP levels are nice and low which means he had no inflammation. His hemoglobin is also slightly low probably due to not eating enough food. And his blood sugar and hemoglobin amyl c levels are very good for his age and quite low. What about his physical health markers? His resting heart rate is low which is a marker of good cardiac health but his blood pressure is too high. With a combination of these markers, a low resting heart rate could be predictive of future heart failure, but it wouldn't have been the case if Jerome wasn't malnourished and if he didn't have high blood pressure. So Jerome was in excellent health until the age of 111. And after he got kidney disease, his health slowly began to decline. So he stayed healthy for long and then crashed with his health. If you don't have long living parents, then the key to living longer is extending your health span, staying healthier for longer so that you could add healthy years to your life. You extend your health span by reducing the risk of chronic diseases and comorbidities that end up killing people such as heart disease, diabetes, hypertension, dementia, kidney disease, and frailty. How do you extend your health span practically speaking? By staying healthy and functioning fit for longer. With age, you see a decline in things like muscle mass via to max speed, power, and bone density. The faster you lose these aspects of health, the shorter your life expectancy is going to be. That's why it's important to stay physically active throughout your life to slow down this decline and extend your health span, to stay physically ten to twenty years younger than your peers. However, if you do get diagnosed with a particular chronic disease early in life, it doesn't mean that you can't reach the age of 100. You actually can. A 2003 Danish study on Danish centenarians found that about twenty four percent of men and 43 of women did get a comobility before the age of 80 and they still reach the age of 100. They were called survivors. It also highlights the sex specific difference in longevity. There are nine times more female centenarians than male centenarians. And women appear to be able to live to the age of 100 even if they get heart disease or diabetes at a much higher rate. What it means for men is that if you wanna live longer, you need to be fitter and healthier than women because men have a higher risk of heart disease already to begin with. One amazing example of a survivor is Orville Rogers who died at the age of 101 in 2019. At the age of 50, Orville discovered he had a blockage in his heart and he had heart disease. He then started running in his fifties and ran until the age of 100. Not only did Orville make it to the age of 101, but he also set two world records for his age group at the age of 100 in the 60 meter sprint and 400 meter dash. That was only one year before his death to a heart condition. Orwell is an example of a survivor and a longevity rock star. He lived with heart disease for fifty years and also broke world records at the age of 100, which is just amazing. And all of this because he started to exercise. The most important message is that by having a healthy lifestyle and practicing preventive health, you can greatly increase your likelihood of reaching the age of 100 and beyond. You might have good genetics. You might have parents who live to the age of 100 while smoking. That's good for you. It means that even if you smoke, you would have an extremely high likelihood of also reaching the age of 100. Genetics is just so powerful. But for those who don't have long living parents, which the majority of people watching this are, they have to eat healthily, they have to be physically active, they need to have good relationships, and keep their stress low, etcetera. For example, one of my grandfathers died at the age of 36 to colon cancer. My other grandfather died in his mid seventies. One of my grandmothers also died in her mid seventies, and I only have one grandmother still alive in her early seventies. So I don't have any good longevity genetics. There's no one in my family that I know of who's lived longer than 80. So I need to follow a healthier lifestyle to not die early in life. Here are some main takeaways of this video. Centenarians live so long mostly because of genetics. But the genetics works by reducing the risk of heart disease, Alzheimer's, and cancer, as well as lowering their biological age. You can get the same effect by following a lifestyle that lowers your risk of these diseases and keeps you healthy. A longer health span predicts longer lifespan. If you stay healthier for longer and postpone chronic diseases and comorbidities, you're expected to live longer because your body gets less damage. Some of the genetics that extend lifespan like FOXO three a work through increasing stress resilience and immune system function. By getting better at managing stress and keeping your immune system strong, you can also extend your health span. Insane growth through high IGF one expression shortens lifespan. Don't try to become a mass monster bodybuilder and definitely don't be obese or diabetic as those things increase IGF one levels. Don't smoke because if you smoke, you have a zero point zero zero zero zero zero one percent likelihood of reaching the age of 100 even with good genetics. Even if you had good genetics, you would live longer if you didn't smoke. When it comes to practical tried and true lifestyle habits that the longest living people share, then it's been researched to involve healthy eating, natural movement, stress management, good sleep, positive relationships, and avoidance of risky substances such as drugs. How strict you wanna be with your lifestyle depends on your genetics. If you have good genetics, you can be less strict with your lifestyle and also how long you wanna live. If you don't care living longer than 80 or 90 years old, then yeah, you can be less strict with your lifestyle. And if you have good genetics like parents and grandparents, they all live to the age of 100 and 110 then yeah you can practically do almost anything as long as you avoid the extremes of an unhealthy lifestyle. If you want to follow an evidence based longevity routine that I follow then check out this video next.