Nick, Seem, nice to see you both. Likewise. Nice to see you all. This is my first roundtable, so I'm honored to share it with you two, fellow knights of the roundtable. And the theme of today's discussion is dietary supplements for longevity. And I thought it might be fun to begin with a few lightning round questions. If you were to imagine a situation in which resources are no issue, so you have all the time, all the money, and you get to give a body weight adjusted dose of up to two nutraceuticals and or drugs to every adult age 30 or older. And you could choose the dose and the frequency if you want people to live longer and have as long a health span as possible, which would you pick? And I'm gonna start with you, Nick, because alphabetically, you come first. Thanks. Two molecules that I can I can give people? It's not gonna help necessarily with a lifespan, but it is going to help with health span and I would argue creatine. I guess it doesn't really necessarily have to be, weight adjusted, but that would be one of them. The other one, again, off the top of my head, would be, let's say something a little more potent like rapamycin, which probably, at least based off of what I've seen, seems to have some pretty promising results in terms of longevity and, and health span. So those are my, those are my two choices. How do you go, Four C? That's given you some time to think about it. There's obviously a difference between like health span and, lifespan. I think creatine is, yeah, for sure, like one of the best health span supplements for, brain performance and, physical performance. Arguably, if you extend health span, you probably extend lifespan as well a little bit. Creatine is safe bet to that, especially older people would benefit a lot from. Number two, I would say high quality omega-three supplement, mostly for cardiovascular benefits, brain benefits, helps with inflammation and immunity and all those other related metabolic benefits and higher blood. Omega-three levels are associated with, longevity, so there might be something there. If I were to add an actual, let's say, lifespan pharmaceutical, then grabamycin is quite interesting and I would think that it has potential, maybe in the future, we'll see, in the next few years, maybe there are some clinical trials on that. But for the general population, I would think that actually something like a carbozo or metformin would be also relatively safe bet because it's pretty safe and most people just have slightly higher blood sugar and slightly worse blood markers than it should be for optimal longevity. The lifespan data about Metformin isn't that convincing. Acarbose might be more convincing than metformin, but, for just the idea of postponing metabolic disease and reducing the risk of diabetes, that will probably be be one of the, like, actual pharmaceuticals that could also have some effects. I too would pick creatinine monohydrate, and then my second choice would probably be a GLP-one receptor agonist if we're speaking about the general population, which I would choose, I'm not sure. It probably wouldn't be tizepatide. It would probably be somaglutide because we know quite a lot about it at this point. It would be a relatively low dose, and I'm not saying that it's something that would benefit everyone. It probably wouldn't benefit any of the three of us, for instance. But if we're speaking about the gen pop, then I think it's a really strong choice, particularly when it comes to creatine. And interestingly, if you do consider the cost of distributing that to everyone and you look at that relative to the potential health care savings, then right now, it wouldn't make financial sense because semaglutide is really expensive. And there was recently an economic analysis looking at that and tizetine and a couple of other obesity medications. But cost isn't a factor in this hypothetical scenario. If cost were a factor, then would you modify your responses? For creatine, I don't think you would. So we can disregard that and instead focus on the other choices. Rapamycin is definitely coming down in costs. There's a few companies that sell it now that have it not super, super expensive, but it's definitely pricier. Metformin is much, much cheaper. So I might be convinced to go that route because I really like Seam's, thought process on it, especially if you're talking about the general population. You know, especially as you get older, you might be getting into that prediabetic, level. So potentially, metformin would be a great benefit in that regard. So, yeah, I could be swayed on that. Because GLP ones have like a double whammy effect, but they also help with weight loss, in addition to blood sugar. So in that sense, they're more potent than metformin. I wouldn't know which one to do. It depends on the If there's no cost, then perhaps some future generation GLP-1s that are safer. Maybe not as potent as the one that is used for obesity. Maybe there's something that's 50% as effective as the Ozempicronomic and that's maybe that would be more suitable for the general population. And just to be clear, metformin is a cheap drug. So Yeah. Your low cost option can remain metformin, which might be my choice. I'm not sure. It's a good candidate. Another one that I think might prove to be very interesting is taurine, and we'll come back to that later. And on that subject, we might come back to it now. I don't know. What are a couple of the most underappreciated or under recognized yet promising gero protectors in your opinion? Yeah, I think taurine might be one of those examples. There's actually quite quite a lot of like research about taurine's effect on metabolic health and blood pressure, plus some exercise performance benefits. Compared to the cost and the safety, then it's pretty underappreciated. It's obviously not as cheap and effective as a creatine. Even now you could say that creatine is still underrated, but taurine is pretty good one. I mean, taurine's excellent. Yeah. I'll go a different direction. I'm kind of torn actually between two, but, I would go You got two choices, Nick. Oh, I get two choices. I'm never no longer torn. In that case, I would I would go curcumin. I've been doing a lot more research on curcumin and I've been doing, research on blood sugar, how it helps people with prediabetes, diabetes. Also, it seems to have some pretty profound effects on osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis. So my vote goes to curcumin. The other one is a combination supplement, so hopefully you'll allow this, Master Greg. But lutein and zeaxanthin are pretty high up. They're not they're not ones that are discussed that much except in the ocular community, which we are big fans of. In terms of the studies on lutein and zeaxanthin, they seem to be really, effective. I mean, there's plenty of clinical trials that show, improvements in eye health. And just because of the nature of the molecules, they also seem to affect the brain. At least Lutein, I've seen some evidence for. I'll go, I'll go with those twothree, molecules that are underappreciated. Doctor. That's a I like lutein and zeaxanthin as well. And the second one for me would be Azoxanthin, which is also a carotenoid. The lifespan data is quite interesting, that it helps with lifespan. It's senolytic, it has skin protective effects against UV radiation. It has some metabolic effects and has been seen to lower inflammation in clinical trials, but that's not the main, I guess, effect. It's mostly for the skin, probably has some brain benefits as well as a carotenoid. I'm a fan of all of those. My choices would probably be phycocyanine and glucosamine sulfate as something that is truly underrecognized and has some real potential. Yeah. Those are good choices. Come back to those and discuss them in more detail later. What about underrated or under recognized medications? Can, restrict you to a single choice in this instance? Actually, which you gave on your second second molecule, I think GLP one receptor agonists, some people are really into them. And then other people think drug equals bad, so therefore try to avoid it at all costs. And I think that the data is incredible in relation to those. So I think that they're for a large group of individuals that are extremely reticent to, jump on any sort of drug. If the label drug or pharma is associated to it, they will not touch it. I would say that's a bad move in a lot of circumstances. Maybe not every circumstance, but in a lot of circumstances because they can help with blood sugar regulation, weight, triglycerides, LDL, everything covers so much. So, and it can really help people that are that are really struggling with, with making sure that they're consuming the appropriate foods in the appropriate amounts. And there's actually even some research in relation to its effects on the brain that it can, change how people perceive, let's say, junk food. That would be my choice. Even though plenty of people know about it, I think I don't necessarily know if they appreciate the potency and the overwhelming positive effects that come with them. Yeah. I think the negative side effects are a bit overhyped and they're quite manageable with diet and, resistance training and those just general healthy lifestyle principles. It's relatively safe. So I'm thinking of, okay, when it comes to general life saving effects, not directly, but let's say if you take the drug, then you improve certain outcomes. And I would say some sort of blood pressure medication is probably very important in the sense that high blood pressure is one of those things that very fast will decline your health. Compared to obesity, it's going to take decades. But with blood pressure, the kind of immediate consequences are a bit more detrimental that you wanna get your blood pressure in check quite fast and you don't wanna have like high blood pressure for long periods of time. So in that sense, the blood pressure medications are underrated, but I wouldn't never think it's a long term solution that what most people would want to take. Yes, you want to improve your lifestyle. You want to get off the blood pressure medication as fast as possible. But, as a quick fix, you know, it's worse to have the high blood pressure than it is to take short term blood pressure medication, in my opinion. In a general sense, I would probably, again, maybe some sort of blood sugar medication at Carbo's or Metformin. It's a bit underrated. Like there is, yeah, with Metformin, there's some side effects, this increased lactic acid and might affect androgens and might lower VO2 max, for example. Again, the effects outweigh some of the side effects for people who do struggle with, blood sugar and metabolic issues. Nick, I find it ironic that a lot of those people who are anti drugs and anti medications are also keen caffeine consumers. Methadine blue. Yeah. And then regarding the GLP one receptor agonists and food intake, that seems to be true of addiction in general. There are these studies ongoing now looking at things like prediction to nicotine and whether they might be used from that context. And then seen regarding blood pressure medications, I think they're a really interesting choice. And it raises an intriguing tangent, which is about substances that directly target the biology of aging or things that pick people off prematurely. So in this case, cardiovascular disease being a huge killer. And my choice would be quite similar to yours. Initially, these drugs were developed as blood pressure lowering medications, but I'd probably choose p d five inhibitors like sildenafil and tadalafil, viagra or cialis. Sildenafil interestingly is being studied in the ITP now as a candidate for gerotherapeutic. People do seem to live longer when they take them in part due to lower rates of cardiovascular disease and they seem to have some very protective effects in the brain too which surely relates in part to vascular function But there are data associating their use with lower risk of Alzheimer's disease. Well, actually, they're one of my joyous choices. I was thinking with age, men men's, you know, their reaction quality declines, blood flow declines, and the IBD five inhibitors, they support blood flow, thrombotic oxide, and they also lower blood pressure. So, yeah, a lot of cardiovascular benefits and, you know, sexual benefits. Are those effects on quality of life in general? If you've got a romantic relationship, then that's gonna be good for you and have some indirect positive actions on your health. And then just to detour from supplements briefly, I thought it would be fun just to ask you guys a few personal questions since I put you on the line. One of them is what's the most stupid thing that you've done in the name of health or fitness, Nick? It doesn't have to be the most stupid if it's something that you don't wanna share. But I think we've both been interested in these subjects for a while. I know that I, for one, have done some pretty stupid things over the years. Most of it comes down to when I was first getting into exercise and lifting weights and whatnot, the vanity of it all. But, I think the the stupidest thing that I did was, it's it's gonna come off like a humble brag, which I really don't want it to. When I first started lifting weights, I I lifted weights for two and a half years, and I I did these three hour marathon workouts. And I did them every other day because I thought you had to stimulate your musculature every forty eight hours. You gave yourself one rest day and then you would lift again. And, it was just this antiquated dumb idea. And I did that for two and a half years. I I worked through injuries, didn't matter if I was injured, didn't matter if I was sick, which is horrible to do. But, yeah, just two and a half years of obsession and psychological torture just so I could achieve the the body of a Greek god. By the way, it did not achieve. So so it didn't really work out for me. I also gained, 90 pounds. Some of it was muscle, obviously, if you're gonna be working out for two and a half years straight, but, I gained a lot of fat for sure. So I never repeated that mistake. But, yeah, I would say that's among them for sure. I can't think of another one off the top of my head, but I'm sure I had plenty of others. I did the, like, the polyphysics deep experiment where I slept for four hours throughout the twenty four hour period for a hundred days. Yeah, that wasn't necessarily a health thing. I knew it wasn't a health achievement, but, I'm I'm I just wanted to try it out, like, see if you you can function doing that. Definitely had, like, short term consequences. If you had to buy AG1, I m eight, or have someone take $30 out of your pocket, which of the three would you choose? Okay. First of all, you did not answer the question, the previous question. Ah, sorry. You can't you can't escape. Well, I I think I told this story in the podcast before, but I nearly crushed myself under a massive wardrobe doing pull ups while I was locked down. And that wardrobe was really heavy, and I basically got saved by a bed and escaped with the €300 fine because I was in Palermo, the capital of Sicily at the time. We were being good citizens, and we were all cooped up for five days for fear of spreading COVID. Neither us had COVID, so be it. Other choice would probably be and this cracks me up to think about it. It's very relevant to today. When I was 15, I first took creatine. And when I put my order from some UK supplement company, I also bought some glutamine powder because it was popular at the time and some caffeine powder for pre workout, obviously. I think one of the nurses or someone at school found the powders, and they were terrified of my creatine consumption. And they completely disregard the fact that I had caffeine powder. I could readily have killed myself with a few grams of that. Fortunately, I was just smart enough to not take large doses of it. But looking back, that could easily have gone badly wrong. So to return to AG one, IMEI for being $30 down, Nick, what'd you go for? Bear in mind, you've gotta buy one of these two supplements or just have someone take first dollars out of your pocket. So okay. I'll give you an ethical and a non ethical answer. If I were a non ethical person, I would take AG1, and then I would start shilling that as the best product in the world and get somebody else to buy it. But considering I consider myself semi ethical, I I I would take I would take the loss of the $30, just because then at least I would know that my money wasn't going to to one of those companies. I would take the I'm eight at least because they show the ingredients and, you see what you're getting. Plus, my co author, doctor James Danica Lanzonia is one of the advisors, so I would support him. If you're after your friends, I'll piggyback on Nick's answer and choose his first unethical answer because you're more ethical than I am. So I'm plugging it straight on eBay. Same question for you. Is Brian Johnson the healthiest person in the world? The issue is that, based on what data, so like he shares his spreadsheet of my biomarkers. First of all, it shows only like 48 markers or something. And second of all, he added the asterisk that it's done over the course of two years. So, so it's not even like a single test, or right now, like he can tell you that I have the best XYZ marker, but that test is from two years ago. First, it's also impossible to claim to make because everyone has some different definition of health. And even then with the blood markers, it's also hard to draw, like, that kind of a conclusion from, like, a set of, blood markers. And and, you know, after all, he doesn't actually have, like, okay, January 2025, all of the blood markers. It's, you know, some of the blood markers are from ages ago. So it's kind of a nitpicking, some of the data. And who would win in the fight, you, O'Brien? Well, I think I'm a lot heavier than him. I'm, like, eighty eighty two kilos. He's probably something seventy five or My money's on UC. Mine too. Nick, couple of questions for you. Baltimore or The Congo? The Congo. Nick with an h or Nick without an h. Without an h. I you know, you know, every time I get coffee, I'm like, just because I'm I I like messing with people every once in a while. Just whenever I get coffee, I'm like, because they asked for your name. What's your name? And I'm like, Nicholas. And I'm like, without an h. Please pronounce it without an h. Do you guys have one or two favorite comments that people have made on your YouTube videos? Good gracious. I have There are some absolute gems. Well, for me, there's always something like, why do you sound like a robot? And, it's like 50% people like the, my voice and then 50% are like, what what does he sound like? I've, I've gotten a mass amount of of different comments. Oh, right now I have kind of a sub arc going on on my channel because I have I just haven't worn a belt, when when recording my videos and whatnot. So every once in a while, I pull up my pants. Don't ask me why I don't wear a belt. I guess it's it's just not as comfortable as just not wearing a belt. And anyway, people have been begging me to to just wear a belt or wear suspenders. So I I do enjoy the the the long list of comments that I've gotten, and I do plan on playing kind of a a little bit of a joke on on my community just based off that. But, I mean, aside from that, you get all the the creative insults and really the the lack of creativity. I do, I do wish that some of my commenters, when they insult me, that they would be a bit more creative in how they insult me because I don't know. It's just not as much fun, when you when you have a little bit of a back and forth. I would say the the third group is I've gotten some comments and some messages from people that that are truly thankful and and really appreciative of, of the the work that I've been able to put out there. I think that we've all been able to put out there. It does mean a lot to me just because, again, trying to put out, good information is, is difficult to do in this, you know, the the world of of social media. And maybe on that subject, do you have a favorite YouTube channel or one that you pay particularly close attention to? And when I ask that question, you can't give each of your channels. Same. I my my vote very much goes to, Nutrition Made Simple by Gil Carvallo. I think he's an absolute rock star and I will continue to sing his praises. I didn't have like a special favorite YouTube channel. It kind of shifts all the time, what I'm just particularly interested in. Sometimes it's like geopolitics, sometimes it's some entertainment, shifts a lot in that sense. But from the health space, I would say maybe Brad Stanfield is a good, source of, information. He it's good that he, tries to call out nonsense or tries to look into more details. Do you have one, Greg? That's the time. Do I have one? Yeah. James Hoffman. Which of us? James Hoffman. James Hoffman. Okay. Coffee night. Okay. Okay. I know I know of him. I think I might know of him because of you. Probably. I know. It's great. It's very entertaining. If you like coffee, you'll enjoy it. Okay. If you don't like coffee, you might still appreciate the production value and just how quirky he is to, like, quirky people. Mhmm. But anyway, returning dietary supplements. We'll get to Jero Protectors shortly, but there are some widely used supplements that target intakes of essential nutrients. So essential fatty acids, essential amino acids, vitamins, minerals. And I don't want to go into any depth here, but I just wanted your hot takes on a couple of these. So seem you mentioned the omega three fatty acids earlier. Nick, what are your thoughts on these in the context of aging, if you had to summarize those thoughts in the space of a paragraph or less? Thank you for giving me a limit. I I love omega threes. I think they need to be dosed appropriately. But beyond that, I think they're fantastic for like, Seem mentioned cardiovascular health, but also brain health or some evidence. So, yeah, I'm I'm all for it. And seem you feel similarly. There was the recent study with omega-three supplementation seemed to decrease some of the biological age score. Obviously, it's not very clear what it means or how accurate the test might be, but, you know, I wouldn't be surprised, that the omega threes would have that kind of biological effect if it was, true. The study you're referring to is a study by Steve Horvath and his colleagues. I think it was him. One of him he was one of the authors. Yeah. Yeah. And they looked at the effects of round a gram of EPA and DHA from algae oil for a couple of years, I think it was, and they found reductions in both pace of aging. They use the Dunedin PACE measure and several second generation epigenetic clocks that we think measure something related to biological age. And they looked at relatively old adults. So the average age was in the mid seventies, which is an important wrinkle because it might be the omega three supplements could reduce some proxy of biological aging people with quite low intakes. So we're quite late in life and therefore have plenty of scope to reduce their biological age. Whereas earlier in life that might not be the case. In that study, they also looked at vitamin d as well as combinations of vitamin d, omega three fatty acids, and exercise. So what are your thoughts on vitamin d? I haven't done a ton of reading on vitamin D, but my impression is that well, okay, I'll say one thing. I do think that the social media landscape has gone absolutely wild with vitamin D to the point where it's just this this careening barrel down a hill that has no sense of, like, stopping. Like adding, you know, fifty thousand IUs of vitamin d, I think, to me is is nonsense. I I don't think that there's any need for it. I could be wrong. Well, maybe maybe in the future, I'll read a study where they say you have to be consuming these megadoses. But I have read studies that have indicated that taking these megadoses can be harmful to to bone health over, many years of of consumption or injection because they're also injectables. Vitamin D is a great supplement. It's just that the dosing I think has gone really wild, with certain people that I shall not name. Doctor. So vitamin D, it does, it has like some evidence from clinical trials that might help with like testosterone or some other benefits. It's hard to say like whether or not taking a vitamin E supplement would be equal to having, you know, the vitamin D from the sun. It was popping up, like, the exact same benefits. I mean, there are some some of these clinical trials with vitamin d supplementation that did seem to reduce all cause mortality risk, slightly, and cancer risk as well, I think, but not heart disease risk, which is, interesting. But again, yeah, you ideally wanna get it from the sun, but, you know, most most people aren't spending that much time outside. I think this one is interesting because it brings up many nuances that we need to consider, like how it interacts with other nutrients. So if you think about cardiovascular risk, then it's different taking vitamin d three in isolation versus combining it with k two, for instance, how that can influence calcium deposition in different tissues. And then where the vitamin d is coming from. So if it was d two versus d three or vitamin d that you synthesize as a result of sun exposure, how would those interacts with your lifestyle and your genetics too. So take someone who's got lots of melanin in their skin. That means they need a larger amount of UVB radiation to synthesize a given amount of vitamin d. For someone like that, let's say someone of African ancestry who's living in The UK, they're probably more likely to benefit from vitamin d supplementation than I am. And then Nick, I think the point you made is really important. Safety is a real concern. It's fat soluble. There are some things where if you take them in excess, you end up with practically fluorescent urine in the case of b vitamins. Or maybe they clear you out at the other side if you take big dose of magnesium oxide for instance. But your body doesn't really hold on to them. Whereas vitamin d being fat soluble can be stored in your body fat and ultimately could be toxic. And there are these rare case studies of people who have achieved such high levels that they do experience that toxicity. So more is not necessarily better. Finally, multivitamins and multiminerals. What are your thoughts beginning with you, Nick? I'm a fan, but I'm not crazy about them. There's a little bit of data from I forgot the name of the trial, like the MIND trial or something like that, indicating that it can have a very small effect at preserving cognitive function over years. I think it's the COSMOS? Cosmos. Cosmos mind, I think. The COCO one as well. Yeah. Right. And there's, there's a a bit more evidence in some other trials indicating that it can be pretty helpful. I just think that the effect is so mild that I think that if a person just says a well rounded diet, that's probably not necessary. But if you wanted to have some sort of low dose, I think the way I approach it is I'd say I'd take a multivitamin, but I usually just cut it in half just because I just don't think that I need a 100% daily value from this one supplement, especially when you have all the interactions between the different molecules. So, yeah, to me, I'm a fan, but it's not like the end of the world if you don't take a multivitamin. You know, probably has some effects. You know, how much? Hard to say because every multivitamin is also differently formulated, different amounts of the vitamins and minerals. And, some exclude certain minerals, some include additional ones. So, yeah, even with these COSMOS trials or whether there are other clinical trials, you're never gonna find the exact same kind of formula unless the company is doing their own research. Maybe getting something like, okay, you get a 20% of your daily vitamins and minerals from this supplement, maybe that can be helpful or maybe 80%. So we don't know necessarily how much is the benefit. If you get more than a 100% of certain, vitamins and minerals, it can also have some negative side effects. So it's not yeah. Like, just more is better. Not at all created equal. And, Sim, do you take one? I'm guessing you probably don't. No. I'm not. Do you take one when you travel? No. I mean, from my blood work, I've seen that I don't have any deficiencies with the exception of, like, B1 is often, slightly low. Like, if you measure and you see that, okay, you have low magnesium or b one or b twelve, whatever, then you can kinda specifically take, that supplement. But it can, like, be an insurance policy. Right? That's one of the reasons people take it. You might not need it if you already have adequate amounts of all the vitamins and minerals. Testing is a subject for another day just because it's not as if you having insufficient status of a given micronutrient will always show up as low levels of that in your blood. So regulation is much more complex than that. And moving on to Hold on. Hold on. What do you think about multivitamins? I think my thoughts largely overlap with you guys. They're not all created equal. I think you probably should consider different formulations whether you're a guy or a girl. So if you think about women of reproductive age, for example, who are cycling on a regular basis and therefore losing blood, then they're regularly offloading iron from their bodies. Whereas us guys, we're not doing that unless we actively give blood, and therefore, our micronutrient needs are different. That's just one example. But, clearly, the specifics do matter. I think there are some small benefits to be had in certain circumstances, but the benefits probably just relate to the intakes of the individual micronutrients. So for instance, there are data looking at things like neural tube defects. So that's probably just the function of the fat for as folic acid in the multivitamin, and the effects of the multivitamin don't seem to be greater than just taking the folic acid in isolation. So I think targeted supplementation would be better. But I do think they have their place, and that's more true of people with lower quality diets. And for me if I'm traveling to parts of the world where I know I'm gonna struggle to access healthy food on a regular basis, so let's say I'm in Southeast Asia for a while and I'm consuming too much fried chicken and white rice because that's all there is available, then in those circumstances, I'll take a multiditamin. And then the rest of the time, I won't. I think Yeah. For the general population, they're not a bad idea. They're not for everyone. My impression is that some people default taking them as a kind of insurance policy when they really don't need to and they should actually just stop and think about what they're likely to need Mhmm. Than within the multivitamin beer. They'll be more specific. What's that, Steve? Yeah, there's actually research that, the people who are the most likely to take a multivitamin are the least likely to need it. And the ones who are least likely to, or like most likely to benefit from it are the least likely to take it. That makes sense. So moving on to these anti aging supplements. When I say gero protector, I'm really referring to things that can potentially protect you against aging. So slow the aging process, whether that's systemically foreign specific tissues, things that do act on the biology of aging per se. There are lots of things that we should consider before we choose to try one of these ourselves and one of them is evidence of their actual effectiveness. Each of us will have a slightly different bar for the level of evidence that we think is necessary for us to consider taking them. Where do you guys set that bar? What kind of evidence do you want to see before you'd consider taking something yourself? It's hard. How do you, define biological aging and how do you define slowing down it? How do you measure it? How do you know if it's working? So there's no clear answer to that. I would say that, you would have to rely partly on like animal studies in that area of biological aging and the life extension, because, you know, it's just very hard to do in humans, partly you would you could, you know, rely on some of these different pathways or like the hallmarks of aging, as well. So like, okay, you know, at least one of the major ones like mitochondrial dysfunction or, chronic inflammation or cell senescence, for example. We pretty much know from human data as well that, you know, chronic inflammation accelerates aging and increases the risk of all the chronic diseases and shortens lifespan. So, something that would alleviate inflammation theoretically would also just slow down biological aging, maybe not through acting on the process of biological aging directly, but just because inflammation is in excess harmful. I guess the challenge is again like, okay, people who are most likely to take anti inflammatory supplement, they're already kind of more health motivated. They don't necessarily have very high levels of inflammation where they would see those benefits. So, maybe for us healthy people taking a supplement that would help with senescent cells or help with lowering inflammation, it maybe doesn't have almost any effect. Maybe we don't know that. But I would say out of all the supplements out there, what I think would help with slowing down the speed of biological aging, I would probably say something like AKG is quite interesting. I think, you know, there's animal data that it extends our lifespan. It targets multiple hallmarks of aging like stem cell exhaustion, inflammation, and genomic stability, and mitochondrial function, and many others. But it doesn't have a lot of clinical data. There is one study from 2021 where they gave AKG for six months with Vitamin D and this Biological Age Score declined by something like seven years, I think, within six months of use. Now, that's not very good evidence. At least they measured it, right? Whether or not the measurement is accurate is a different story, but they measured it that it worked. There's animal data that is extended lifespan, and there's mechanistic data as well that it interacts with these different hallmarks of aging. That would be, like, one that I would add to this list. So addressing some of the hallmarks of aging, having data from clinical populations as well as nonhuman animals. Mhmm. And how about you, Nick? I definitely see the appeal of addressing the hallmarks of aging. I think that's an interesting way to go. I like it, and I think it's a way to go. I think my way tends to be a lot, broader in terms of the only thing I really care about is two things. One, does it affect the multiple organ systems? Does it affect, the functionality? So because so that's a layer above, the hallmarks of aging because the hallmarks of aging are going to contribute to the functionality of these organ systems. And the second thing is the effect size. So if the effect size is teeny tiny, for many years, then I just, don't worry about it. If the effect size is relatively modest, but it happens pretty quickly. And then I look at the population that it's studied and it's people that are just kind of the average person, then, yeah, that's great. It's, you know, it's it's kind of a toss-up. I just tell a person, this is a situation you can consider if, you know, based on your budget, is this something that you you'd be interested in? You might get a little more interested if it's in a specific population of, you know, athletes, for example, to get a a pretty sizable boost in something in their performance, then obviously, that would be something that they would wanna seriously consider. So, yeah, it's really based on those two things. Does it affect your your organ systems as in the functionality? And the second thing is the, effect size. And I guess you could add a tertiary of, of the population that you're studying. Yeah. I agree with all of that. And seeing the study that you mentioned was the study by Brian Kennedy and Co. It was this retrospective analysis. The product in question is called Rejuvant, and it is a multi ingredient supplement. So it's not like we can chalk up those results to the two grams of calcium AKG in that particular product. And Brian Kennedy himself is very quick to point that out. He's an excellent scientist. So kudos to him for doing that work. And like you say, the fact that they are actually studying it and publishing that research and pointing out the limitations of it, I think is definitely a good thing. And then Nick fully agree about the need to look at different organ systems recognizing that these molecules are distributed unevenly. People often speak about targeting the hallmarks of aging, but they only look at a small subset of cells. And if you look at the transcriptional profiles of different cells, they're enormously divergent across tissues and so on. And then also effect size matters. It's easy just to look at a headline or an abstract or something and assume that because something is statistically significant, which often wouldn't be if it was adjusted for multiple testing, it's meaningful, but often it's not clinically meaningful. And Nick, I think you do a really good job in the content that you produce of pointing out the importance of effect sizes and when something does actually equate to something that's likely to affect someone's long term disease risk and when that's not the case. Thanks. And then population is key because, as I alluded to, if you've got people who are quite sick at baseline, you're probably more likely to see a substantial effect size than if people are relatively healthy. Take the example of blood pressure. There are many things that lower blood pressure in people with hypertension. But because of lower effects, those same things probably would have no effect on the blood pressure of the three of us, for instance. Relevant to this is biological sex as well. One of the great things about the ITP is they study mice of both sexes, and they often find that, candidate, gero protector, has a lifespan effect in one sex but not the other. And so when we look at these multi ingredient products, I think it's advantageous to have a product that contains ingredients that have been shown to affect the lifespan or health span of each of the sexes. And then another key one is just safety. One of the frustrations of people like us who spend time looking at this research is that often people get stuck on safety or they disregard it entirely and they don't report all of the relevant outcomes which we need to know about. So it's as if the research ends up forking one of two directions where if you look at the research on senolytics like fusetin and quercetin and dasatinib, so much of that has just focused on safety outcomes. We're still getting these safety trials getting published several years later. Alternatively, people don't focus enough on safety or they don't publish their findings. And then we're left in the dark and we don't know what really is safe. So I think irrespective of what you're taking, having some information about the safety of those substances in humans is really important. And on the subject of safety, we also have sourcing, the form of the ingredients, and so on. So I wonder if you could just speak to that, and we can take an example. So take the example of a plant based supplement. What are some things that you would factor in when trying to choose between different products that are available off the shelf? If they have third party testing, you know, that's just a good sign. And, yeah, I get one pitfall with any supplement is the proprietary blend that, that they won't disclose these specific like, ratios of specific ingredients, or the amounts of specific ingredients. So they just hide it behind the proprietary blend for copyright reasons. But, yeah, in that case, it's just not trustworthy. Well, I don't know what else I would add to that. I think the only supplement that I think of that has a a plant based substitution, if you wanna call it, versus what's been primarily studied is like omega threes because a lot of it come they're looking at, like, DHEA and and EPA. There's less studies that have been done looking at algal oil versus the the fish oils. So, I mean, that's something to consider, but I usually just look at the breakdown. I mean, it's it's true that if you don't know the exact amounts that are included in the supplement, then to me that that puts up a bunch of red flags. But if you do, then if you do see the dosages and you see the breakdown in the molecules that are included and even if you were to go back to one of my previous examples of lutein and zeaxanthin, you need to know that it's not disproportionately focused on one versus the other. There needs to be a balance, a ratio between the two. And that's true of EPA and DHA because those have slightly different effects on the body, if it comes to cardiovascular risk or when it comes to to brain health. And when you go into the subcellular mechanisms, they they work slightly differently. So to me, yeah, focusing on just just knowing, which molecules to to look at, making sure that it's appropriately dosed, and to Sim's point, if they're using a proprietary blend, to me that's a pretty big red flag. Doctor. Yes. It's hard to, you know, for regular people to know of if the supplement they buy actually has the ingredient that they claim they do unless they have, like, yeah, some independent testing or third party testing on their website. Because, you know, even like some these very popular supplements like NMN, there's studies analysis done by, the Drew Najin where they look at the amounts of NMN in a lot of popular supplement brands in Amazon. And, they find that something like a 15% actually have the real amount that they say on the label. And most of them just are under dosed or just, you know, completely zero from M and M. N. So yeah, for the average person, it's almost impossible to like, do they have to go start testing all these things themselves? So yeah, obviously not So it's kind of a challenging situation, but just trying to find reputable brands that are with long history and they've been scrutinized enough and they've had, testing done. Third party testing does matter. And I think it matters for slightly different reasons than it used to matter because there was a time when contamination with performance enhancing drugs was a real issue, particularly in the bodybuilding supplement world. And there were things like deaths due to consumption of certain products on the market. There's a fat burner named hydroxycut that at least one person died from back in the day, if I recall correctly. I think there's less of that now, but certainly what's in the product often doesn't match what's on the label. And there have been studies looking at various different supplements. Seema know on your podcast we've spoken about melatonin previously is another example of that. But now there are reasons to have concerns about other contaminants potentially. A few days ago, I saw a paper published last year looking at micro and nano plastic contamination, dietary fiber supplements. All of the products that they looked at contained plastics, which was interesting, and the powders were more egregious than the gummy products that they looked at. So maybe the things that we need to be concerned about are shifting a bit over time. But these third party testing companies like Informed Support or websites like ConsumerLab can be helpful. Nick, my question about plant extracts was more about supplements that are isolated from plants and then issues related to that, like the standardization of those. So if you take an example like ashwagandha, then there are products on the market like nuganda, k s m sixty six, and others that are standardized for bioactives. Or if you take the example of rhodiola, rosea, shr5 is standardized for rosophins and celebroside, the list goes on. And because those are routinely used in research, we know more about their effects than other products that don't have those names. And they might, in those studies, tell you that there is a certain concentration of the bioactive and it was tested, but you don't know the specific product and therefore you can't source that product yourself necessarily. The specifics of the plant extracts often do matter a lot, more so for some products than others. I think this is especially true of curcumin products because if you can just take turmeric and compare it to something like Longvida or I think the most bioavailable last time I checked was BioCURK. It was over 400 times more bioavailable than the curcumin from turmeric alone. And clearly that has huge implications for what dose might be appropriate as well. And then regarding vitamins and minerals, sometimes the specific thing that the micronutrient in question is bound to matters to so take the example of magnesium. Magnesium oxide, as I mentioned, can have quite potent laxative effects, which can be helpful. I'd rather you take magnesium oxide as a laxative than some of the things that you might buy from your pharmacy because at least with magnesium, you're potentially getting some small positive effects from the magnesium itself. But whereas oxide might be quite potent laxative, other forms like magnesium citrate or glycinate aren't necessarily the same. And then what the magnesium is bound to will also influence things like its tissue distribution and so on as far as far. So the forms do matter. And then another interesting subject, at least to me, is when you take the products, and we can think of this across different time scales, when you take them within your day and when you take them within your lifespan. So I wonder if you could share some thoughts related to that. I take, like, most of my supplements in the morning. There's a, you know, a few exceptions that you wanna take in the evening like melatonin or, you know, your glycine you can take throughout the day. Some other like, you know, ashwagandha you can also take in the evening for stress management, for example. Yeah. I personally like take most of them like, in the morning, as a as a like just with my food or some sort of a protein shake. Do you have any opinions on like the, over lifespan? Like when a person should take? Yeah. I mean, you know, like we said, creatine is one of the best ones for older people. You know, I think every elderly people would benefit from, creatine. And, when you're young, you're less likely to be at a risk of low creatine intake. Like, if you're young, you probably eat more calories and more, you know, animal products that provide, creatine. Whereas older people, they're just you know, one of the problems with the elderly people is that they just don't eat enough. They, it's called, like, the anorexia of aging, that their appetite decreases and, their ability to chew food decreases. So, you older people, they're not going to chew a lot of a steak to get to the creatine. So that's why they're one of the best candidates for creatine and supplementation, besides just the health benefits overall. And I think that a few other supplements are like that, that benefit more elderly people than younger people. Anything related to improving metabolic health and lipids and blood pressure and blood sugar, like, young people probably benefit much less from. Like, if you're 20 years old or 30 years old, then you probably don't need, you know, Berberine to maintain metabolic health and, adequate insulin sensitivity, unless you are, you know, overweight or poor lifestyle. But, you know, a generally average healthy twenty to thirty year old doesn't really need it, or they wouldn't notice like a huge benefit. But, you know, if you're 60, 70, 80, then, just by default, because of the process of aging and not being able to exercise that much and etc, you'll have worse glucose regulation and worse lipid metabolism. So something like Berberine might be useful as just like a way to manage the blood work, with a with a pill. Doctor. Yeah. That's a that's a great point. I completely agree. I think the vast majority of try to address the longevity aspect or the health the over lifespan effect. I think the vast majority of supplements are probably useful for people, at the very least in their forties and beyond, but likely older than that. There's only, I think, a few supplements that I I think are really of any use for anybody in their twenties and and thirties. And the framework that I would offer people is to have the first question you should ask yourself is, what is the outcome that you're hoping for? What's the, use case for the supplement? So if you're hoping to just, you know, guzzle a bunch of supplements just because, you've heard that it's good for x or y or z, there's a lot of questions that are kind of sub questions that come under that that a person needs to ask themselves. If you look at yourself and you're 28 years old and you have, let's say, infinite money to be able to buy all the supplements that you've heard of, it the answer would probably be you still probably shouldn't buy any of them because, they they won't do anything for you. But if you're maybe 68 years old and maybe you have prediabetes, then now you can start to really introduce a lot of these different, supplements. Another thing I'm talking about we were talking about, ashwagandha a little bit of rhodiola rosea. If if you're not necessarily looking at lifespan or if you're not necessarily looking at specific health markers, but maybe you're really stressed or you're really anxious. In those situations, those would be supplements that might be beneficial for somebody who's in their twenties. Let's say you're 22, you're finishing college, you're in your final semester, you're very stressed out because you have all these exams and whatnot. In that case then, supplements could be a benefit that, so you don't have to necessarily go to a doctor, to get a, I don't know, Xanax prescription or whatever it might be. I mean, it's it's very much gonna depend on your conversation with, with a physician. But, and it's again, it just depends on the use case. Now in terms of the timing within the day, again, it just goes back to that same fundamental question of what's why are you taking the supplement? What's the the ultimate goal that you're trying to achieve? And if it's, for example, sleep to seems point, you can take it later in the day. And, if if, you wanted to take it specifically for sleep, that was your main outcome, then, yeah, you would take it just like a lot of studies indicate, which would be, like, thirty minutes an hour before sleep, and you dose it appropriately for that. On the other hand, if you're taking it for the potential longevity benefit then it may not matter as much in terms of exactly when you take it and then it's just based on convenience. So then it comes down to, well, what's sustainable? Do you always forget to take your supplements at night then take it in the morning where when you can easily remember, you know, things like that. So it's really, it's a lot more conservative approach to the supplementation than I think. Again, I just keep talking about social media because it's just it's just rampant. But, that's that's just how I think about it. So I think there's a lot of pretty helpful advice in there. Within the day, you seem you spoke about, you take most things in the morning. Being pragmatic, most people are only gonna remember us to take supplements once a day. And so if that's the case, then taking them all in the morning might make sense. In an ideal world, we'd also be thinking about whether the supplements interact with the circadian clock and clock regulated processes. This is obviously the case for sleep supplements taken later in the day and supplements with stimulant effects which you typically take early in the day. But it's likely that many supplements do interact with the circadian clock. And some of the more interesting geroprotectors probably do as well. And there are a few that haven't reached clinical trials yet that I'm really intrigued by. Curious to see where the research goes in years to come. How the supplements interact with the food that you consume I think is a really important point. So take the example of someone who's trying to boost their iron status. They've got a history of insufficient iron intakes and then iron deficiency anemia. If they're taking their iron supplement in the morning with three cups of tea, then the tannins in the tea are gonna interfere with the absorption of the iron. And so we need to consider that. In the context of gerry protectors, I think one of the more intriguing interactions might be with MG availability because some of the candidates that are out there seem to, in some ways, mimic calorie restriction. And so if you're on a calorie restricted diet already, my guess is that taking a calorie restriction mimetic would have smaller effects in those circumstances. Within the lifespan, one of the subjects that I discussed recently on the podcast that I did with Stephen Ofstad is antagonistic play atrophy, the idea that what's good for you early in life might not be good for you late in life. And based on the biology of that, there are reasons to think that if you take some of these geroprotective supplements early in life they could potentially interfere with your reproductive function. And there's a little bit of evidence in that direction with a few of them. So many of the more potent anti aging supplements might be best saved for later in life as you guys spoke about too. That's probably especially true of some supplements targeting specific processes, so going back to the hallmarks of aging. There are certain hallmarks that aren't particularly relevant early in life, like the accumulation of senescent cells. Unless you've got some sort of fibrotic disease, you probably don't have a big burden of senescent cells, essentially in any of your tissues. And so taking a senolytic is probably not smart in part because it seems likely that there's been an evolutionary trade off between cellular senescence and risk of cancer. That's probably also true of telomere attrition. So it might be that we've evolved such that we have loss of the length of those telomeres and accumulation of senescent cells, in part because those both actually help protect us against the development of cancer. And if we take geropexxive supplements that are aggressively targeting those hallmarks of aging, then that could dispose us to those cancers. And that hasn't been shown clinically yet, but hypothetically, it makes some sense. So I think there is a category of gerry protectors that really should be safe for later in life. And into that category, I'd put things like senolytics. I think glyknacker is an interesting one that will come to you later, just in part because there has been research suggesting that it's potentially helpful for people later in life, probably in part because of chronic inflammation, whereas early in life, any effects are much smaller. With the senolytics, the senescent cells are also involved in wound healing. If you take senolytics, are you impairing your wound healing, in some sense that not been shown yet, but another possible risk? Yeah. And they're even involved in growth and development, I believe. And then regarding interactions, there are lots of these. So age being one of those interactions. I think how these different molecules interact with genetics is relevant in some context. So that's been quite well shown for melatonin. There's common polymorphism in one of the genes that encodes one of the melatonin receptors, the gene is MTNR1B, that produces a gain of function phenotype, which basically means that it amplifies the effects of melatonin on certain outcomes like blood sugar control. And so people who carry that common polymorphism will have more exaggerated blood sugar swings after taking melatonin than people who don't carry it. That's not to say those people shouldn't be taking melatonin, but it does mean that potentially they should be more cognizant of things like when they're eating relative to taking certain supplements. Again, this is minutia, but it it is interesting and I think it it all points in the direction of personalization. How some supplements interact with medications, I think, is is a big one for some supplements at least. Certainly, it's true of things like piperine, which affects the metabolism of lots of different drugs because it acts on one of the enzymes you're involved in xenobiotic detoxification. So basically, if you took piperine shortly before taking certain medications, then the medication's concentration in your blood would have a much bigger area under the curve than had you not taken the pipe dream before taking them. How the supplements interact with other supplements as well. So Nick, you spoke about lutein and zeaxanthin. That's an interesting one just because it probably selectively affect the health of different parts of the retina. But I've already touched on a couple of these, like, vitamin d three and k two and how those influence calcium deposition, how they interact with other aspects of lifestyle. So we spoke about vitamin d and sun exposure, probably relevant to a few other things to light exposure, potentially one of those being melatonin, and then maybe some other lifestyle factors. So smoking is an interesting one. Oral contraception would be an interesting one too just because smoking, if you take that example, does seem to affect the metabolism of certain supplements. Staying on the subject of lifestyle factors, one that has received some attention is how they interact with exercise. Because some of the stronger candidates might hamper some of the ways in which we respond to exercise. Sim, I'll pass this one over to you first. I like the antioxidants, vitamin c and n a c taken after resistance training, might, yeah, blunt some of the hypertrophy, signal and, benefits from exercise. And I I've seen actually with melatonin as well that taking melatonin after you've, resistance trained could have, yeah, like some also like this inhibitory, because inflammation is one of the, one of the signals for the muscle growth. And, if you blunt that with even like NSAIDs, aspirin, or something like that, then, you know, I think, you know, you'll still make some gains, but, probably not some, diminished effect. And if you've got anything to add? I'm silent because I have no idea what to add. Something like berberine could also be maybe because like so berberine would suppress mTOR pathway the mTOR pathway. I haven't seen any evidence in humans that it would reduce muscle hypertrophy signal or reduce, gains from strength training, but, you know, at least mechanistically. So it does suppress mTOR, which is, you know, the growth pathway that gets activated during exercise. Some of that literature, like on the, vitamin c or antioxidants and whatnot, I haven't looked into it too in-depth, but I remember there's this one influential paper where they had people exercise and then gave them a bunch of I guess it was vitamin c and something maybe vitamin c and e, I think. C and e. Yeah. And they showed reductions in, I guess, reactive oxygen species and then some some signaling markers and whatnot. I'm always curious though, if and maybe you you guys could probably answer this better than I could but have we seen any actual, outcome measurements of, you know, reduced hypertrophy or reduced, like, VO two? Like, Sim mentioned with, metformin, some some negative effects, which I have seen those outcome data. But, for some of these other papers, it seems like we're focusing a lot on the signaling, which to me makes a lot of sense, but it's just kinda like that first step of, like, okay, maybe we shouldn't do this. But I I I guess I'm not aware of studies that have actually looked at the functional outcomes. Do you guys know of any? Yeah. There have been a few. Okay. And this body of research actually goes back a while. I remember during my master's degree, 2013, 2014, reading some of Michael Risto's early work looking at vitamin c and e supplementation around the time of exercise, finding some blunt adaptations. And since then, there has been additional work looking at relevant outcomes to so some measures of metabolic health like blood sugar control, as well as some adaptations to training like changes in cardio respiratory fitness, so VO2 max or VO2P, finding some negative effects. In the context of geroprotectors, it's probably been best shown for metformin. So far there have been several studies. Some of the early work showed reduced improvement in insulin sensitivity and VO2max when people took metformin alongside structured endurance training. And then other work showed blunted muscle hypertrophy, but not statistically significant blunted strength gains. I might be misremembering some of the specifics, but that is my vague recollection. And then I think mechanistically, we could extrapolate from that that berderine could have some negative effects because it it does seem to act quite similarly to metformin in many ways in terms of complex one inhibition and in terms of AMPK activation and deregulated nutrient sensing, which is kind of a clunky way of putting it being one of the hallmarks of aging. Many of these different things that do target that, like rapamycin targeting mTOR, it'll be interesting to see whether that holds true for those as well. But in the case of rapamycin, the jury is still out because and this is just the hypothesis. But I wonder if there's gonna be a discordance between what we see in people who aren't doing exercise. So if you look at the pearl trial graphomycin that was published and you can't really make too much of that because of limitations of the study and because of the things that they looked at, There was very very tentative evidence suggesting that people who took rapamycin had marginally better body composition after taking it, but that wasn't in conjunction with exercise training. And you can imagine a situation in which someone takes metformin not doing exercise training. Metformin typically results in a very small amount of body weight loss. So they might lose a little bit of fat mass too and you might therefore assume, oh, metformin's improving body composition. However, we know that metformin, if anything, seems likely to slightly impair some of those adaptations to exercise. So it could be that similarly, rapamycin taken by sedentary people has negligible effects on body composition or even marginally positive ones. But could it be that at the same time, another group of people who are doing exercise alongside taking it have worse outcomes in terms of their fitness gains than people who aren't taking it or are taking it to the seat belt? Yeah. That's interesting. Yeah. With with the rafamycin, mechanistically, we think that it would result in muscle loss because of, inhibition of mTOR. But, yeah, like some other research shows the opposite that it doesn't make people lose muscle, but they actually maintain it, like, protecting against sarcopenia slightly. That goes back to the population study though, right? Because a lot of the rapamy I mean, other than the immune modulatory studies that have been done for for transplants, for rapamycin has usually been studied in people that are at least in, I guess, their fifties and beyond. My understanding is that with rapamycin, they believe that it'll decrease mTOR overactivity so that you can get a bit of a sensitizing effect for for mTOR. But I don't know if that would necessarily be the case for like younger individuals, right, that have highly sensitive mTOR, don't have dysregulation or anything of that nature. I don't know. How do you guys think about rapamycin in that regard? Doctor. Yeah, that's interesting. So the mTOR sensitization, maybe one of the, mechanisms because diabetics also have mTOR hyperactivity because of the high blood sugar. But, you know, diabetics are injected. So, it's, you know, maybe something to do with the hyperactivity of mTOR or, desensitization similar to insulin. Like, insulin can be a very powerful anabolic hormone, you know, bodybuilders inject it to build muscle. But at the same time, you know, people who with insulin resistance or hyperinsulinemia, they have a whole host of problems. Yeah. I I think one of your points earlier too is a really good one about when, like for for muscle growth, for example, that there is usually this inflammatory response that comes in and is a factor when it comes to muscle growth. And I think something that often people forget about is that we get so hyper focused on, like, mTOR, for example, the activity of mTOR, like, oh, mTOR's upregulated. We might have greater protein synthesis and what But there's so many other factors that have to come in. You have to have chaperone proteins. You have to have targeting sequences. You have to have all these different aspects that lead the protein to be sent to the correct spots to be integrated correctly. And I think all of that happens through the actual exercise cascade. So to your point, Seem, about if you're looking at, like, I don't know, diabetic individuals, like type two diabetics that are far along and they're injecting insulin, for example, insulin is a very potent hormone and it's anabolic, like you said, that doesn't necessarily mean that they're gonna end up jacked. And I think that's because we focus so much on the mechanisms that we don't focus enough on what's the overall like, what is actually causing this transduction of the entire pathway to specifically target muscle growth or specifically target, aerobic activity or whatever it might be. So, yeah, it's just, that that's why I was asking about the vitamin c and vitamin e because I wasn't aware of of the research actually indicating the functional, effects. But, I mean, like you guys said, if there are studies, then there are studies. And, I'd actually, I'm gonna be super interested to read those because, I've always had that question. I've just, I've been asked that question a few times and I just haven't had a reasonable response. Doctor. With the antioxidants, it's interesting that even in the randomized controlled trials, people who take vitamin C, or was it like beta carotene or vitamin A, I think was it, were the ones that their intake was actually also seen with higher mortality. Vitamin c, I think, was like, nut, but, beta carotene, which is an antioxidant as well, and vitamin a, their use was seen to increase the risk of all cause mortality. I wonder what's what's the, like, reason there? It's kind of interesting. I think that when people are taking certain things relative to exercise is gonna prove really important. So from my perspective, if I was taking rapamycin, I wouldn't be taking it on days that I'm doing resistance training. Likewise, if I was in my fifties and I was thinking, I'm just getting to the point where I think I might benefit from taking glynaq, I'd probably take it on days off exercise. There's a little bit of evidence suggesting that NAC, one of the components of glynac, n acetylcysteine, could also, because of its antioxidant properties, blunt some of those responses. And likewise for metformin, if someone is doing exercise that's going to improve their blood sugar control on the days that they are exercising, and the main reason they're taking metformin is to improve their glycaemic control, then they could just take that on their non training days, at least initially, and tinker with that accordingly. Probably also some considerations that are more acute than that, so whether you're taking something before exercise, like you're taking it after exercise, and how that interacts with when you're training during the day. It could be that if you have to take it on the same day, then you wanna take it as far from exercise as possible, assuming it's not going to have some substantial effect on your sleep wake cycle. So I think it's another instance in which timing is going to prove really important. And just returning to what you're discussing earlier, I think we've got to bear in mind tissue specificity. We need enough growth signaling in certain tissues to retain the mass and function of those tissues over time. It's true of the brain. It's true of skeletal muscle. And it's difficult to understand all of the complexities of that in different tissues. It might be that just because something on paper is an mTOR complex one inhibitor, we can't assume that it's having that effect in all tissues at the same time. And really what it's doing is it's improving the fidelity of the signal in that pathway in certain tissues, but not in other tissues. Nick, have you got anything to add there? I look pensive. Yeah. Any discussion of science ends up being pensive. Yeah, I think, I think it just goes back to these different molecules that have effects on on these different, like, let's say, the brain or the musculature of the bone and whatnot. I really think that the age effect is something that people just don't highlight enough. You guys do. But I think in general, we don't highlight it enough because we think about mTOR, and these signaling pathways as just doing this one thing. It just promotes growth and it's it's good or it's bad. And I think that as aging occurs and what I've seen in the literature from a lot of different studies if that's rapamycin or if that's some of the Clotho research I'm focusing on the brain right now. In that literature, it seems to me that oftentimes you want to diminish mTOR activity because the overactivity of mTOR is leading to the production of these aberrant proteins. You're essentially making so much of these proteins that are being mislocalized or or just the the the targeting of the signal just gets scrambled in some way, which I don't have the granularity. I haven't done enough research into it to describe exactly how, but it just seems to me like, we we focus on, mTOR in terms of, like, musculature or whatever. And it is generally considered that if you increase mTOR activity that you see an increase in protein synthesis and then the hope is that you then see muscle growth. But I just don't think that it's always, should be considered for anybody listening. Again, I'm not really talking to you guys, but just for anybody listening. It just shouldn't always be considered as well this is good or this is bad. It is very tissue specific like you said Greg, but it also matters on the context of the person that you're talking about, their age. I think their age is just such a massive modulating factor. Also their health, if they're going through mild cognitive impairment, and they're on their way towards, some sort of dementia or if they're perfectly healthy and they're just trying to improve their insulin sensitivity or whatever it might be. There's a a lot of different considerations that need to be taken account. And that's where this whole aspect of understanding the population that you're talking about is is extremely important before we, you know, jump on these bandwagons of, you know, a particular signaling cascade is always good or always bad. It's just a it's just a nuance that I I don't think it's brought up enough in general. Let's start to focus on a few specific supplements, and we'll begin with popular choice, which is the category of n a d precursors. There are lots of these that we could include. The most popular are n r, nicotine mydriveside, n m n, nicotinamide mononucleotide, or just straight nicotinamide. What do you guys think about these? And I wonder if one of you could just begin by explaining what the basic rationale is behind taking these supplements. Why are people doing this? I guess the big reason is because NAD had been hyped up to be a very important thing for longevity and aging, which, you know, to a certain extent it, is. NAD is pretty essential for life and, living. And there is some evidence that NAD levels decline in some tissues, with age. The reason it got popular is because, yeah, just, you know, you take the pill that raises your NAD and then you're maintaining it for longer. I guess, yeah, there is, you know, the biggest evidence that they do work in raising NAD levels that the testing consistently shown that pretty much all of the precursors, niacin, niacinamide, NR, NMN, they all do raise NAD levels, almost like a dose dependent manner. At least NMN and NR do. But I guess with the clinical trials, the results have been a bit more disappointing. There haven't been such groundbreaking results from these studies. You know, granted there are not that many of them, but, the ones that are out there, they're not super impressive as of now. Nick, what do you think? Yeah. You described it well. I so I guess the peep the way people are thinking about it, as you mentioned that you see this increase in NAD and NAD is involved in so many hundreds of different, biochemical reactions within the cells and therefore then you're seeing this, profound effect on, like, mitochondrial health and DNA methylation and all this stuff. However, what's interesting is that then we get caught in this this, like, rock in a hard place because a lot of the clinical trials, like you mentioned, seem have been really disappointing. And I think one of the main reasons is because they're testing, stuff that is not actually the proposed mechanism by which NMN and and all these other precursors are supposed to supposed to affect. So, yeah, we're we're in this position of, like, okay, well, we have this hypothesis that boosting NAD inside the cells is gonna have this widespread effect on all these different biochemical markers, and therefore, that'll translate to, some positive health and functional outcomes. However, that just doesn't seem to be the thing that we're testing. What we're testing is, like, LDL and triglycerides and things of that nature. And I don't I don't know if we would actually see a translation to those types of markers. There have been a few studies that have looked at some functional markers like, sit to stand test in people that are maybe in their seventies and whatnot. Again, relatively disappointing results in that regard. You also have people like Doctor. David Sinclair, who obviously is one of the the people that really made this extremely popular. He's been published on a study. That study, I gotta be honest with you, was just, the statistics behind it and the the way they displayed the data was just, funny. And they looked at, you know, a lot of the the same metrics that everybody else has looked at. I think they looked at a few functional metrics, and they showed some small improvements. But the small improvements, if you look at the the way that they displayed it, they it it I I'm not gonna go into too much detail with it. It's just, it's just not the way that I would have shown the data if I wanted to show. Because if you compare it to the placebo, ultimately, you end up kinda coming to the conclusion that okay there isn't actually that much of a difference. So yeah it's just across like twelve thirteen studies that the clinical studies that I've looked at. Really disappointing results. There's been a few small signals here and there, but by and large, I think that it's, it's just been pretty bad overall. But again, as a final point, I just need to remind everyone that, you know, a lot of the hypotheses were based around, you know, the effects that it might have on, like, DNA damage, for example. By the way, there is one study that looked at DNA damage, and they found no effect in humans. Just a single metric, though, single measure. So, you know, there's I'd be open to to it having an effect, but so far the evidence strongly points, even if maybe slightly off kilter to what it's supposed to be pointed at, seems to indicate that there's no real effect, at least in humans. I like the fact that you emphasized that there was a single marker of DNA damage because like many things, it's not that easy to measure proxies of DNA damage in people. I haven't read the study that you mentioned, David Sinclair's study. Can't say that I'm terribly surprised going by David's rich reputation. And I do think that these supplements mechanistically make sense. NAD is really important. It it helps shuttle electrons within cells in ways that support energy production, has some non redox effects too, so it's a cofactor for loads of enzymes involved in things like DNA repair. And so on paper, it's great, but as you guys are saying, the clinical research just hasn't really panned out, and neither is the preclinical research because there have been a few lifespan experiments and Mhmm. NR failed in the ITP to extend lifespan. I think there are probably lots of facts that are at play here. One is that they do raise NAD levels, but in some tissues and in some people, people's responses are very heterogeneous. And so I wonder if that's a contributing factor. Many of the clinical trials are also quite frustrating. They tend to look at NAD concentrations in certain tissues predictably, often blood. They almost always look at some inflammatory markers in the blood and then like many supplements, it seems that some of the other outcomes that we might be more interested in, things like blood pressure and so on, respond most positively in people with the worst measures at baseline. There's also a question of alternative ways of raising NAD. And, Nick, I know that you published a video, which I thought was very thoughtful, about the new Cheeto time product and the study that Nicola Conlon and her colleagues did on that. So I wonder if you could explain to us something about how people are approaching other ways to boost NAD and whether these alternative pathways seem efficacious based on what we know so far. Yeah. So what they're trying to do here is they're using the salvage pathway to increase NAD. But instead of just inputting more of these NAD precursors, what they're doing is they're trying to target some of the enzymes around NAD and try to reduce the the activity of certain enzymes and increase the activity of other enzymes that ultimately would lead to an increase in the pool. I think the idea is really clever because it's possible that, you know, we've just been inputting all these precursors and they just get siphoned off, by these enzymes. Maybe the enzymes become more active and end up, eliminating a lot of the, the NAD. So they talk about like CD38, NNMT and NANT. Yeah so these different enzymes that they end up I guess addressing through like parsley extract, rootin, EGCG, and, things of that nature as well as, of course, an n a nicotinamide to to increase, NAD. So they they did this through a randomized controlled trial. They looked at, blood NAD levels, and then they looked at, these different enzymes to see if there was greater levels of these enzymes or reduced levels based off of what they wanted to see. And they showed that for example like SIRT1 which is one of the enzymes that's supposed to be using this NAD was increased after twenty eight days and actually before those twenty eight days when this substance, the stack, I guess you can say, was applied to individuals and in the placebo, they didn't see that effect. They also sell that with one other enzyme that they were trying to target but they didn't find that in certain other enzymes. They also looked at some inflammatory markers and showed a very slight decrease in certain inflammatory markers and then they looked at a biological age change, as well as glycated serum protein, which I think fed into this, biological age change. So overall, when you look at the study, the effects are really mild, which of course could come down to the fact that they only did it for twenty eight days, which is completely fair. But they also didn't I hate to say it, but they also didn't use the right statistics in a lot of their, measurements. And considering the effect was just right on the cusp every single almost every single time, It to me, it raises this massive question of, like, well, if they just done the right statistics, would they like, for example, for for multiple measurements, they use, paired t tests, which and then for for some of the other measurements where they did they did right use the right statistics, the effect was just so tiny. So going back to this question that I always have of effect size, it just doesn't seem that impressive. So that's that's what I took away from it. But I will say just to their credit, I really love their approach to this. And maybe if they just tweak it, that they can get to some real effects, which would be really, really cool. Doctor. And they're one of the main NAD boosters in there is the niacinamide. Plus they have other things like green tea extract, I think apigenin as well. So there are different pathways that support the same salvage pathway. ApoGen inhibits the CD38, which is one of the main consumers of NAD that increases with age, is like inflammatory glycoprotein. And then you have the green tea extract that activates AMPK, which, supports the salvage pathway enzyme, NAMPT. So, yeah, you have, like, different pathways, or targets for the different, enzyme. Yeah. That type of systems biology approach is really interesting. A few things that I'll highlight. One is that going by their data, and I'm not sure how much we can make of those data if I'm being frank, The size of the NAD boost was comparable to what's been reported in studies on NR and NMN so far. If anything, it was probably slightly lower than the average. Although, we need to bear in mind that if you look at those studies on NR and NMN, they often use high doses. You buy true NIAGEN, the standard dose that you'll get is three hundred milligrams, although they've got another product which is one thousand milligrams. But most of the studies are around the thousand milligram mark, which works out as being tremendously expensive. And I'd say to the point of being exclusive for most people. The statistics point is well made. I think it's true of a lot of research across the board. It's true of research in this sector too. One of the more egregious examples was a study that I read recently, which was the widely discussed, highly publicized metformin study that looked at a certain type of macaque. They just measured everything under the sun. Everything that you could possibly think of measuring in every tissue, in every cell, and they didn't correct for multiple testing. I just sat there reading it thinking, are you kidding? How has this been published in this prestigious journal? But, actually, it's symptomatic of a bigger problem with that journal. So that is something that people need to consider that unless they're scientifically trained, frankly, they're likely to miss or unless they're statistically trained, they're likely to miss. When you cons let's say you run across a study, and they use the wrong statistics. Let's say they use a a t test when there's three comparisons or four comparisons or something along those lines. At what point do you dismiss the study and at what point do you say, okay, even though they use the t test, do you maybe look at the effect size and say, well, it's a 50% difference. So those probably doesn't matter which test that they would have used. Does that run across your mind or you do you just dismiss the study entirely entirely or how do how do you think about that? I wouldn't just dismiss it entirely necessarily. I wouldn't necessarily then go and calculate an effect size. That is something that you can do with sufficient data, but I wouldn't pull out my calculator. And instead, I'd try and make sense of the entirety of the results, and I'd be looking at those graphs to look at changes in the respective groups. So hopefully there's a placebo group and an experimental group. But really that is a question of sticking your finger in the air. That's not a very scientific way to approach things and so my confidence in my interpretation of results from those studies is very low and my confidence in that particular supplement is correspondingly low because of that publication. But once more, kudos to them for actually publishing the research and for trying to understand what the supplement is doing. And I think they were also somewhat hamstrung by some circumstantial issues. I vaguely recall that COVID might have thrown a spanner in the works as has been true with a lot of research over the last few years. So regardless, I think we should tip our hats to them for doing that work. I just wouldn't recommend that product as an alternative way to boost NAD over NR or NMN. This brings us to where I was going, which is alternative ways that people have tried or that people are just starting to experiment with. Early on, there was a lot of research in resveratrol polyphenol that's found in abundance in certain plants, famously red grapes. People spoke about it as being the source of the French paradox, the idea that French people have good health despite their high consumption of red wine and maybe it's this miracle polyphenol that's found in red grapes. And David Sinclair, sure enough, made a fortune based on this idea when he sold a company that was basically making spin offs of resveratrol to GSK for hundreds of millions of dollars. That went under several years later. Well, I don't wanna get too distracted by that. Resveratrol has continued to be studied, and it gets slammed by a lot of people in this world. But do you guys think that it has any application in geroscience or in trying to help people allay aging? I'll I'll defer to Seem on this one because I've actually not done very much research on resveratrol at all. Yeah. So the story is very interesting that, it started in the late nineties already. And very famous people were involved in the research like Matt Chamberlain and Brian Kennedi and Gerald Donardo or something. Loni Guarente, I think. Yeah. Guarente. Yeah. And David Sinclair. They were all working on that. Sertuins and Lifespan and reseroxol. In 2004 was one of the studies where they first found to extend the lifespan. But, yeah, I mean, the subsequent follow-up studies didn't find those effects. And, yeah, the GSK that bought the Certris company, that was David Sinclair's company, yeah, they stopped researching the resveratrol, after a few years after they bought it. So, yeah, the lifespan data is definitely very, murky and, not really repeated. With human data, you know, you have some or, like, there is, yeah, one one, I guess, condition where they've found extension in lifespan was when they fed, like, these mice 60% coconut oil diet, and they got super obese. And, resveratrol enabled them to live a bit longer. So it's not like the resveratrol has, again, pro lifespan effects in otherwise healthy people. It's just, if you're super obese, then, it might mitigate some of the harms. So you survive for a bit longer. Is that like the diet that mice have in The Caribbean? It's coconut aminester of the Caribbean mouse diet? Yeah. It's just super obesogenic. I don't think like, you know, mice aren't supposed to eat coconut oil. So I mean, I mean, there's actually in humans, there is some clinical trials that in diabetics and overweight people, resveratrol does have some benefits on lipids and blood sugar and those things. So it may be some parallel effect that you see from the mouse data from, you know, bisagenic mice. But otherwise, you know, it doesn't really have any health effects on otherwise healthy people and potentially has harm for in humans, there's like androgens. In older men, it's been seen to decrease androgens, not testosterone, but androgens, and, possibly like VO2max and other, exercise benefits as well similar to, like, the antioxidants. I haven't seen that research, but my impression, similar to yours, is that it does have some modest positive effects in some populations. We We see that with blood pressure, blood sugar control, and a couple of other things. And people have thrown it under the bus completely understandably given the backstory. But I'd be really curious to see someone compare equivalent doses of resveratrol and NR head to head. Yeah. See how the groups do relative to placebo. Yeah. With the VO2max, it's a bit blunt some of the benefits. So it does so if if you exercise, you will still see an increase in VO2max, but it's smaller than if you're not taking resveratrol. Yeah. It's a common theme. So you it blunts some of the benefits. What about terastilbene? Like, it might be that if you haven't got to resveratrol, then you haven't got to terastilbene either. But, Seema, have you got any thoughts? So there is no animal data about lifespan that I've seen. And, there's no not many clinical trials either. The only, I guess, downside to that is that it raises LDL cholesterol unless you're combining it with grape extract. There was a study that found that the teratiline alone raised LDL, but if you took it with grape extract then it didn't. And, you know, there's not no other studies that I've actually seen. I think there's a single study looking at isolated terastylvane supplementation so far, and it's just a safety study of a hundred milligrams. So we can't extrapolate much from that. Terastylvane is an ingredient in one of the Elysium NAD boosters, and they have published a few studies on that, but that's in conjunction with an NAD precursor. So you can't tell much about the effects of tera still being per se based on those analyses. And then there are potentially a couple of other ways of boosting NAD. If we put aside the systems biology approach where we're trying to also reduce the activity of some of these enzymes that are chewing up NAD. One of these that I only came across relatively recently is trigonidine, which is in coffee. Have you guys come across that? No. I'm not. It's quite interesting just because it's in coffee in quite high quantities. It's basically methylated niacin, and there has been some work now in other animals showing that it consistently boosts NAD. One of the interesting things is that it does so in skeletal muscle. NR and NMN don't do that. They do so in blood, and they might do so in the brain, which is encouraging because I think that could have some clinical relevance to certain populations in particular. People experiencing some neurodegenerative conditions, but they don't affect skeletal muscle NAD substantially. Tregondylin does seem to, which is intriguing. Maybe a combination of these different cursors could have some additive effects, or maybe trigondylin in isolation will prove more efficacious than NR or NMN or nicotinamide. Another that we'll come back to later is ergothioneine, which is acting through a very different mechanism, but does seem to substantially boost NAD. And I suspect that the effects of that on different tissue compartments will be more widespread because cells in lots of different tissues seem to love ergothioneine and readily and greedily take it up. Before we get there, this isn't a subject that I'm gonna chime in with my thoughts on just because I've addressed it previously in a podcast that I did with Rebecca Strawbridge. So if people are interested, then they can tune into that. But people in the YouTube world have broken up to the potential merits of lithium in the last few months in particular. Any brief thoughts on lithium as the Jarrow Protector. We've discussed it in the past. I'm a fan, of the microdosing lithium. I've only looked at it in relation to cognitive health, if I remember correctly. So looking at cognitive decline, and there's some pretty impressive clinical small clinical trials that have looked at lithium, and at the very least delaying, but at least over the course of the study, which don't ask me how long the study was because although that is very important, seems to completely stop the regression or the the continuation, I suppose I should say, of mild cognitive impairment, which, that alone is really impressive. I'd like to see that kind of done over longer periods of time because mild cognitive impairment is not something that just appears and, you know, gets worse day after day. It tends to happen over, you know, many months, many years. But so far, I think the evidence is is pretty good. I'd like to do some more research on that because it's definitely a fascinating, fascinating molecule. Doctor. Yeah, I agree. The brain, I think the biggest benefits are for the brain, the evidence suggests. But there's some of these observational studies that even like the areas where they have more lithium in the drinking water, they have lower suicide, lower homicide, and greater life expectancy. And, the theory is then, is it the lithium that has some of those effects, maybe like mental health, like traditionally is used for bipolar disorder, right, and mania, manic episodes, and the microdose lithium might have, like, some mental health and mental stability benefits, which, you know, goes into homicide and suicide, area. But, yeah, obviously, it's not a very controlled experiment in that scenario. But looking at the mechanisms, then, brain benefits are quite interesting. There's some, I think, some mouse study as well that lithium inhibits some of Alzheimer's related proteins or tau tangles as well, which is, you know, very early to say anything about that. But, you know, definitely does some some, due to something with the brain. Can't think of a way to smoothly transition to the subject. But AKG came up earlier, and AKG is a Krebs cycle into media, which is quite biologically promiscuous. It's involved in lots of different things, it seems. And in the last few years, people have started adding it to supplements for a few reasons, I think. One of them has been the publication of some studies on rodents showing potential effects on certainly health span, potentially lifespan too, and then also the retrospective analysis of Rejuvant that we discussed earlier. What do you think about AKG as a candidate? And do you have any idea how it's acting? I haven't looked into it a whole lot. So seems I think as far as I know, seem you've looked into it, a a little bit more than I have. But AKG, I mean, the way I think about it is if it does have an effect because it's so mitochondria centric, it would probably, to me, make more sense to address any sort of mitochondrial dysfunction than it would be to specifically target AKG. But again, that's coming from a pretty naive standpoint at this point. Doctor. Yeah. I recently actually wrote a chapter for my next book, on AKG. This is like a book on supplements and AKG is one of the ingredients. Biggest reason why you see some of, like, the health benefits in animal studies is probably with, energy production and, the Krebs cycle. And AKG is also involved in, like, some other other metabolic functions like protein metabolism and, even oncology synthesis and those things. But, human studies, there's very little, I mentioned the biological age study, but that's not very practical. They didn't look at functional outcomes, like grip strength or other health markers, which another study is doing right now. So, they're replicating the previous one, plus they're looking at grip strength and blood pressure and, other things. It's called ABLE trial, and it's probably gonna come in a few years or next year or something. Other human clinical trials, mostly our own wound healing. There's no evidence that it would help any age related diseases or chronic diseases, but there is yeah, like that it supports wound healing, maybe like bone density as well. There was like some postmenopausal women who saw some increase in these bone resorption markers, but they also took calcium AKG compared to regular calcium. So, there might be some extra effects from calcium AKG than calcium alone. And, interestingly, for skin benefits, it helps with the wound healing, but it might also support collagen production. There's no human trials yet, but most of it is on human cells, skin cells, and that kind of thing helps with maybe barrier function or collagen synthesis in the skin. So, yeah, I mean, you should have more human studies to come out, but, it's kind of interesting for sure. It's gonna be really intriguing to see that study that Brian Kennedy is doing. Yeah. So I think he's looking at two grams of time released to AKG, which would be calcium AKG because that's what they're using in Rejuvant. And it looks to be a very well planned study. I like the study design. I looked at it on clinical trials at some point last year. And I do think that there's smoke there. I'm just not sure if there's any fire. And I find it really hard to interpret the research that's been done so far. As you pointed out, Seem, there have been a few beneficial effects reported. As well as the things you mentioned, I think there's been a tiny bit of work on some proxies of physical function. But when you look at those studies, some of them have used calcium AKG, some of them have used quaranethine AKG, some of them have used arginine AKG. The doses have varied massively. The ones using calcium have used time released AKG because normally it's got a vanishingly short half life. It's five minutes or something like that. So I wouldn't necessarily expect it to do that much. And therefore, I just don't know what to make of any of it. Yeah. And I won't know what to make of it until we see the results from that particular study. Nice to hear that you're writing that book scene. I'm looking forward to reading that. I'm sure within that book, one of the subjects that you've covered is what appears to be one of your favorite subjects, and that is glycine. Yeah. Seem's favorite amino acid. Seem, tell us about glycine. Yeah. I mean, glycine is, I guess the reason I like it is because it's, you know, appears to be very safe, does a whole bunch of different things. And it has, benefits from both some human studies and animal studies, not for all of the proposed benefits. But, yeah, in human studies, it helps with sleep, it helps lowers blood sugar slightly. And yeah, like if you look at the study with the GLINAC, glycine is 50% of that. So it might also have some effects on inflammation markers, grip strength and some other functional outcomes, waist circumference, what they measured in the GLINAC studies. But yeah, the animal studies, the reason why it might it's thought to have some lifespan effects, it did extend lifespan in the ITP study as well. So one of the reasons they thought is that it mimics methionine restriction, which methionine in excess has been seen to shorten lifespan. But it turns out that it's not only because of the excess methionine, it's more so about the balance between methionine and glycine. So if the mice are on a high methionine diet, if they're getting more glycine as well at the same time, then it doesn't shorten their lifespan. Whereas if they're only extra methionine and low glycine, then that seems that shortens lifespan in many animal models. So, yeah, in the modern diet, a lot of the foods have more methionine and less glycine, like muscle meats, whereas you get glycine from like tendons and ligaments and, jello, more like collagenous, kind of substances. So that's one of my rationale is to take glycine for the kind of methionine balance because, I'm not on a zero methionine diet or anything. So, makes sense to kind of, balance that. Other things that I think make lysine worthwhile is that it supports collagen synthesis. It's like one third of collagen and, collagen supports collagen turnover. There's no human studies that it supports skin antiaging or wrinkles. There is for collagen And, you know, there's different mechanisms why collagen peptides appear to help with skin, wrinkles, and aging, but, the glycine might be part of the reasons there. And, yeah, the Glothon we mentioned as well. So, the reduction in inflammation in the GLINX studies comes from the increased gluathion, which glycine supports with NEC. Speaking of the methionine glycine ratio, there is also some human studies that low glycine status is associated with higher visceral fat. And we know that in animal studies that the methionine restriction decreases visceral fat. And in humans, methionine restriction also improves insulin sensitivity. So again, might be some of the ratio here that if you increase the glycine, you might see some improvements in insulin sensitivity and you might see decreases in visceral fat, which we don't have a study yet. But from my own personal anecdotal experience, I have seen that reducing the methionine and increasing my glycine intake did result in loss of visceral fat to actually do very low levels, which might be more dangerous. But, from my own experience, it did affect my visceral fat levels, as well. You haven't got any visceral fat seen? What are you talking about? Well, fifty fifty four grams is 54. There you go. Need a microscope to see it. You miss the most important thing too, which is that glycine basically tastes like sugar. Yeah. You can mix it with cottage cheese or Greek yogurt, like unflavored for the protein. You can add a glycine there for some, sweet flavor. Yeah. I'm surprised that I'm even mentioning this in fear of embarrassing myself. The strangest thing that I enjoy each day is inulin powder, short chain inulin powder, which is slightly sweet mixed with glycine powder. Mhmm. It's like candy floss. It's genuinely so nice. How how do you eat that? You just put it on a spoon or what? Spoon. Mhmm. Straight down the hatch. Rawdogging into that. Methionine and amino acid balance is a really interesting subject. And I think you're absolutely right about the balance between the amino acids being the thing that matters rather than methionine restriction per se. And if you haven't read it, then prior to the publication of your book, I would suggest reading a review paper that Steve Forstad wrote about different forms of dietary restriction, which he discusses amino acid restriction because it is interesting. I don't agree with it all, but I agree with much of it. He goes into some of the specifics of those ratios and how they relate to health outcomes. Another point that I'll flag is that there has been some work looking at glycine and lifespan, and I might be misremembering this, but I believe that it used Fischer Rask, finding that glycine extended lifespan but didn't push down methionine. And so clearly, it's not just exerting any benefits through methionine restriction mimicking. There are probably other facts that are at play too, like change in inflammation. And, Nick, I'll turn to you in a minute just to fill in some of those gaps because I really like the video that you made about glycine, autophagy, mTOR, and how those tie together. And then there does seem to be something of a glycine gap between the amount that our body synthesize each day and our potential metabolic needs. And there was a review paper that was written about this a few years ago, and I thought that the authors over interpreted the data a little bit, but I suspect that there is a gap. And, certainly, I think most people stand to benefit from increasing their glycine intake a little bit. Happily, it's also very cost effective. It's cheap as well as being tasty. So it feels like an easy win. Yeah. Nick, I'd love to hear a few of your thoughts, including touch on what those mechanisms might Sure. So I've I've looked at, two different areas for glycine. So I'm definitely not as extensively educated as Seem on this, but, I've looked at the, as I alluded to earlier, the sleep studies, in humans. And there's definitely a mild I don't think the evidence is actually fantastic, but there's definitely a mild effect, it seems like, across, I think, four studies in humans. Again, assuming that you're taking it, like, an hour before sleep, and I think the dose is, like, three grams or something like that. But the, then I looked at the ITP study, looking at the longevity effect. And in that study, the researchers speculate as to some of the mechanisms. So this is speculation that I'm just kind of conveying from what the researchers say, that glycine Greg, you may have to refresh my memory if I get one of these details wrong. That glycine well, actually, I guess I'll start with methionine. That methionine acts on mTOR, which stimulates mTOR, which can lead to the activation of mTOR in a negative way. And I guess over time that you have this continuous overactivation of, mTOR. But the way to reduce that or one of the ways to reduce that is by the methylation of glycine. That's right. I think the methylation would happen to methionine, making it more potent against mTOR, but glycine somehow interacts in that pathway to stop the methylation. And it itself gets methylated, which allows, I believe, methionine to get, removed from the cell. Again, I'm kind of squishy on the details on that. But something along those lines that ultimately acts as this kind of, this this triangle effect of methionine with mTOR with, glycine that, ultimately leads to this life, life extension effect. Of course, I mean, when you're talking about the ITP, that's when you're talking about doses that don't necessarily translate to to humans. But even if we can get a small amount of that through the amounts that we do consume, or if you're an addict like Greg, then should be a problem. You can just continuously just keep, keep taking glycine. You'll be good to go. But, that's that's my understand. Oh, and also in the ITP, I think you guys mentioned that there was this, life extension effect. I need some semaglutide out with my glycine addiction. There you go. And what about glynac, Nick? Do you think that glynac is gonna prove to be more effective in helping to slow down the biology of aging than glycine in isolation? Oh, that's a really good question. It's tough to answer simply because I haven't looked at some of the so Seem was talking about some of the effects it has, like, on blood sugar and and visceral fat and whatnot. I haven't looked at that data. So, it seems like maybe there is, like so I don't know how to parse the evidence on glycolic, which is glycine and the n acetylcysteine. There is a good amount of evidence on n acetylcysteine itself. I just haven't looked at the the glycine, side of the equation but the GLINAC data which I always add this stipulation that it comes out of one research lab it's well established. It's out of Baylor, University, of school medicine. It seems like they they do pretty great work, but I still wanted to add that disclaimer out there just because I I would like to see a lot more data on Golineux specifically that comes out of some independent labs. But so far, the evidence really I've I've found that evidence because I'm I'm pretty conservative when it comes to supplements. And I've I've been pretty shocked at the, the effect sizes that they see in the the general just overall. The I mean, I was talking about earlier about the the functional effects, the the organ effects across multiple organ systems and the effect size. Glynacs seems to just crush all that. It has effects on functionality, like muscle function, has effects on mitochondrial function, has effects on blood sugar, has effects on literally everything except the maybe I think the only thing that they didn't see an effect in was either, like, cholesterol or was it blood pressure, one of those. But everything else, it just and it wasn't, like, small differences. I mean, over twenty four weeks and and longer of consumption, you see these really tremendous effects. Keep in mind, this is in people in their seventies. So again, it goes back to the specific population that we're talking about. So would this apply to to people who are younger? I think that the answer is probably not. You might see some some positive effects, but would you see as great of effects or nearly as great of effects as you would in in these seven year olds? The answer is no. But I mean, if if I if I were 70 or once I hit 70, and hopefully there's more data on GLINAC at this point, to really corroborate what we've seen so far out of this one lab, I am a 100% getting on on glycine and anosceles cysteine. 2060, you'll be placing your order. 2060 GLINAC. You know, but one of the main mechanisms, I guess, the GLINAC works in those clinical trials is the increased gluathon and reduction in inflammation. So you have to be someone who, you know, has higher inflammation, which elderly people generally do because of natural aging, and they have lower gluathione levels. So, yeah, they're kind of the prime targets to get those impressive results, which younger people probably wouldn't see anything I think from that mechanism. And I don't think it's going to be like some miracle drug, but probably I would probably think that, okay, what I'm what supplements I'm gonna give to my aging mother or grandmother? Like, I would put probably give them, you know, creatine and probably give them, like, lysine and NAC as well, personally. So the problem actually is the dosage. So in that study, they found that the dosage was quite large. They used something like a hundred milligrams per kilogram. So that's something seven, eight grams of both glycine and NAC. So you have a sixteen gram serving size. And the lower doses and most supplements are something like one gram is like most supplements, the Glyndex supplements, one gram of NAC and one gram of glycine. Most of the NAC ones are actually even lower than that. So I think the dosage might be also very important because in that study, the higher doses did, have a bigger effect for at least raising Glutathione. So the lower dose of something like two grams probably might not be even even not enough. And if you haven't tried NAC before, you're in for a treat. It is absolutely delicious. Nearly as good, if not better than glycine is. Then you need to double the glycine to a 100 Double it? I think probably You you double it. You 200 fold. Yeah. Five fold the glycine for the taste. Yeah. I think we need more research and more research from different labs too. It doesn't strike me that the authors of that have a vested interest, but those clinical trials have all been from the same lab. And I'd argue that there's been one strong study so far, and that's it. And finally, KINAC is being studied in the ITP. So watch this space. I'm very curious to see how it does given that lysine led to some small improvements in lifespan. I believe that was true with both males and females. So another amino acid that I think we all have some interest and some affinity for is taurine, which, like lysine, is arguably conditionally essential. Nick, I think one of the most popular videos that you've ever done was on Tory. He took over YouTube for about forty eight hours when he published a video about Turing. So tell us about Turing, mister Tory. Well that that that video was a breakdown of the science study that, released I guess what now two years ago. It's crazy how time flies. Yeah, exactly to your point. It's, it's considered a semi essential amino acid because they mentioned that blood levels of taurine decrease, over time, especially by the age of 60 here at just a small percentage, a fraction of what you are at, what you have when you're like 10 years old or 15 years old. And they found that to be the case across multiple, systems. So not just not just looking at, human levels, but also looking at, monkeys and, mice. And then in this study, which they looked at a whole host of different parameters, I imagine the, metformin study, which I haven't looked at, Greg, but I imagine that one probably, did something similar. Correct me if I'm wrong, but they looked at just like a a ton of different things. Right? Take the taurine paper and multiply that by about 10 and you're nearing what they did in that formula. Mill. Okay. That's incredible. I don't know if I wanna read it now. It's too much work. Yeah. But the the taurine, they looked at, DNA damage. They looked at stem cells. They looked at satellite cells. They looked at reactive oxygen species. I mean, everything under the sun, they they they looked at. Apparently not though. Apparently, the metformin paper is much bigger. So so they found positive effects across, let's say, fish, mice, those are the big two, and then they cleverly, which I appreciated, I very much appreciate because I I imagine this took a lot of work to do just for one figure, just a part of a figure adding, giving taurine to monkeys and then doing a number of tests on those monkeys that they also had done in mice. And they showed similar effects across the board just in those measures, which was like something like eight to 10 measures, which is still a lot, you know, if you're if you're considering the amount of work that that gets put into this kind of stuff. So they tried to to bring it back to a little bit more of a of a, Homo sapien element. But, yeah, across the board, taurines seem to be, extremely beneficial for all these different health span metrics. Also, bone was a was another one that they looked at, body weight, body fat, neuromuscular coordination, strength, I mean, anxiety. I mean, it's just a bunch of different things. So, it the only thing that I call into question with this kind of stuff, these kinds of massive studies is if you're looking at, like, mouse anxiety and you are a researcher, I always wonder how much experience you have looking at a metric like mouse anxiety and, are you bringing in a researcher that does have experience on that? Because to be fair, they do have a lot of researchers on this paper. So it is possible they brought in somebody that does know about how to assess mouse anxiety versus mouse memory versus mouse grip strength, you know, all these different, aspects. But overall, the point is that the the study, which was, really influential, found some really positive effects. But then you can go beyond that and look at some of the performance effects that have been, looked at with touring and the effect that it has in, in exercise training, and it seems to have some some positive effects there. And then I've looked at some research on metabolic syndrome. It seems to have some mild, positive effects there as well. So overall, it's it's definitely on my near my top list in terms of supplements and amino acids to look at, long term just over the next five, ten years. Yeah. I I agree. Like, it's hard hard to say. Like, yeah, it's a miracle molecule, but, you know, in humans, it has been proven to help with blood pressure and some other metabolic health markers. And, I think I guess it's another one of those things that, so the larger doses like six grams have been seen to be more effective for the the metabolic syndrome and exercise. And, you know, they'll get six grams from, food. It's gonna be hard. Like, I think the Japanese probably get six grams from that because they eat a lot of the seaweeds, which is the highest, dietary source of taurine. But, you know, other than that, you get it from fish and meat. But you do need to consume something like several kilos of, meat to get, like, six grams, per day. Just real quick, on the meat aspect, I think something that people often lose sight of is they focus in again, I just, I keep saying this, but they focus in on one mechanism or they focus in on one molecule like taurine. And they say, well, now I need to eat mass amounts of meat. Meat is therefore good for me because it has taurine in it. And I think we really need to start separating those those two concepts. But anyway, this aside, you know. But related to that, it does also imply that certain people are more likely to benefit than others, namely people who consume plant based diets. That's true not just of taurine because taurine tends to be concentrated in slow twitch muscle fibers. So you get most of it from the dark meat that you would get from turkey or chicken, say, as opposed to the lighter breast meat. But it's also true of creatine. Creatine B vitamins. Can be found, Yeah. Exactly. Creatine can be found in high concentrations in particular in fast twitch muscle fibers. The lighter muscle is true of b vitamins. It's true of glycine, which you can find in connective tissues, and it's true of other things too. So just bear that in mind if you are vegan and you're listening to this, you probably get an outsized benefit from taking some of these things relative to the three of us omnivores. I'm not sure you're an omnivore, Nick, but I believe you are. On Seam's episode where where we discuss my diet, I just said, I just don't tell people because people get so mad. They just start they just start dismissing everything you have to say based off of, what you eat. So I just don't tell people. I just eat glycine and then Glycivore. You know, actually, what's the highest source of creatine? It's not like meat. It's actually herring. It's got like twice as much creatine than, meat. Yeah. Yeah. Sardines very rich as well. And something else to point out with taurine, which is a true of glycine too, as far as we could tell, it's got an excellent safety profile. And it's approved by all the different regulatory bodies like EFSA. And that's not true of everything that we've discussed so far. For example, NMN was relatively recently outlawed by the FDA. Nick, I don't think where you are, you can get it so readily from supplement stores or Amazon anymore. And I believe that NAC is now in a regulatory gray zone in The States too. Both of them are available over here in Europe. And I think the NAC was redacted. Was it? Yeah. But the NMN is still you you can still buy it, I think, but, I guess the FDA is deciding what they're gonna do with it. Are they gonna make it a prescription drug or not? But, I mean, it's not a prescription drug. It's a dietary supplement. You can get it from food, of course, in very small amounts. The crystalline MIB616 is the molecule that David Sinclair is doing with, the MetroBiotech, which is a form of NMN. So that's the reason why the FDA is investigating NMN as a pharmaceutical drug because of the crystalline MIB616, which, you know, is theoretically like a, you know, a pharmaceutical. So we'll see what happens when he sells that one's GSK. Yeah. I think that that might be the one, don't quote me on this, but that might be the one that, they used in that study that he was involved in. Yeah. Beta NMN. Yeah. Okay. Well, sure. The FDA can have it. Then we have ergothione, which is an amino acid thiol, technically, and it's something that we consume in particular from certain strains of mushrooms. And I've developed a very keen interest in ergothioneine in recent times. I'm very optimistic about its promise. To date, there hasn't been that much clinical research. In fact, there are only really a couple of studies looking at functional or morphological outcomes so far. I'll pass this one over to Euseem. What do you make of phagothioneine? And are you taking Igeth? No. I wrote about it in my last book, the longevity leap. But I guess my conclusion was that, yeah, like, it's interesting. You probably wanna get it from diet, and there's not enough human studies yet to make any conclusions. So, like, I and it's, you know, like, healthy foods have ergothione, like mushrooms and different vegetables and stuff. So it's hard to say is it the ergothione itself specifically, or is it these other health other things in the healthy foods? But, you know, it doesn't you would want to probably eat mushrooms and the vegetables and those different, ergothioneine foods, anyway. So, yeah, not not sold unlike supplementation yet. I believe that is that the doses of ergothioneine used in studies so far aren't that high. Some of the early work used five milligrams which is a quantity that you could get from a reasonable amount of certain types of mushrooms. It's quite large variation between mushrooms in their ergothioneine content. But if you consume modest quantities of things like oyster mushrooms then you'll probably at some point get there. More recently, people are starting to use higher doses, twenty five milligrams or so, which you struggle to get through diet alone. And if you scale up the quantities from preclinical lifespan experiments to humans then we're talking about quite high doses. Whereas one of the things I like about taurine is that if you scale up the quantities that Vijay Yadav used in his experiments to humans then we're talking about three to six grams for a seventy kilogram person and if people are interested in that then I interviewed Vijay as well for the podcast and had a long chat about taurine. Nick what do you make of phagothione? I'm not going to ask you if you take it because next one is top secret diet. I do not take ergothioneine. It's funny. I can mention supplements. People are like, okay. Okay. Fine. Perfect. Fine. Moment I mentioned diet. Oh my god. Anyway, so I I haven't done a ton of research. The only research I've done is that one Spiegelman study, that tried to figure out the mechanism of action, which I thought was really interesting. The the enzyme that it acts on gotta love scientists for their creativity in their names. Three mercaptopyrruvate sulfur transferase or MPST, mitochondrial enzyme, and seems to to improve, like, mitochondrial respiration, which is a a marker for mitochondrial activity. Looked at the effect that this enzyme has on a number of different enzymes within mitochondria and, just in general, seemed to have some pretty profound effects. They also looked at, exercise, synergistic effect that it has with exercise as well in relation to this enzyme and again found some some pretty, remarkable effects. So to me I mean, Greg, you're probably far more educated on this than I am. But, to me, if this translates to humans, I think it's, it's incredibly promising. I'm excited about it for several reasons. One of them is the basic biology of ergothione. It seems to have its own individual transporter, OCTN1, sometimes called the ogothione transporter, which is expressed more or less ubiquitously throughout the body, both on cells and on some organelles like mitochondria. The cells will not only take it up, but actively accumulate it in themselves over time. Initially, it was thought that they do so for its antioxidant properties, but the line of thinking regarding that has changed. The person that's done the most research on ergothione, if people wanna read more about it, is very highly well, but various people are now contributing to this body of work. If you look at the preclinical research, then it seems to be good for lots of different organ systems. Many mice models have been studied, looking at everything from how their lungs respond to smoke, to neurodegeneration, to metabolic health. If you look at the lifespan experiments on those animals, then it does seem to extend lifespan as well as various markers of health span too, which is a conversation for another day because how we define health span is variable between people. There's no consensus on that just yet. Then there's the epidemiology of ergothioneine intake and levels. Ergothioneine, like many of the things that we mentioned, including taurine, tends to go down with age, and lower levels are found in various different chronic disease states. And lower levels are prospectively associated with increased full cause mortality, so risk of dying regardless of what the cause is. There have also been some untargeted, unbiased metabolomics analyses where you take a sample from someone, let's say it's a blood sample, and then you measure all the metabolites that you can measure in that sample. And quite consistently, Iago Thionine appears out of the midst of hundreds or thousands of metabolomic markers as one of the markers that's most predictive of better future health based on what's been looked at so far. And then we now have these clinical studies which initially looked at safety, unsurprisingly it's very safe when you get people isolated ergothioneine. Again, the doses aren't that dissimilar from what we're consuming just from the diet. And then there have been a couple of studies looking at cognitive function and also some biochemical markers showing that ergothioneine is good for cognition in older adults. So when you put all of that together, plus some of the specific things that we're seeing in those preclinical models, One of which is an improvement in physical function, which we don't necessarily see with some of these other candidate gerry protectors. And the fact that it's gonna be relatively low cost, I think, widely available. I don't really see a strong reason to have any concern about taking it, and I think there's a lot of potential upside there. Interesting. My best guess is that if you stick it head to head against a lot of these other new chief schools, phagothione is gonna perform really well. But that might be misplaced confidence. How much would you need? In the mouse experiments, they use parts per million in the channel normally, don't they? I don't know what it would be, but I also don't know what the optimal human dose will be. I just know that the study doses so far begin at five milligrams. And at five milligrams, people are seeing some cognitive benefits. So I suspect that that's the low end of the range, and there will be some dose response. And the optimal dose is gonna vary between people depending on various factors because there are differences between people and how readily they take up ergothioneine. Unfortunately, it does seem to be the case with ergothioneine, and this is true of some other candidates, that the ability of older people to take it up might be worse than younger people. And we need more research on that. That's certainly a possibility. And then just add one more thought going back to the NAD discussion. There was a very interesting series of experiments done quite recently looking at the effects of thiagothioneine on lifespan and health span in model organisms and their data overall suggested that many of the positive effects of ergothioneine were probably mediated by increases in NAD in different tissue compartments. So it looks at tissues like skeletal muscle. But the mechanism is very different from something like nicotinamide, which is providing a precursor to NAD for the salvage pathway. And I'm a little bit hazy on the details, but ligothionine seems to be increasing NAD by initially increasing hydrogen sulfide production. And then that hydrogen sulfide persulfidates proteins. So it sticks to a sulfide group on proteins as a form of post translational modification that then influences the activity of those proteins. And that includes a protein that's involved in producing NAD, and then that in turn boosted NAD levels. And they did various different experiments to show that this rise in NAD seemed to directly contribute to many of the positive effects. So I think that at some point it will be compared head to head with things like NR and NMN for its effects on NAD. And we might find that some combination of them is best, so that wouldn't surprise me at all. Maybe, for instance, ergothioneine and trigonalin are particularly good at increasing muscle NAD, whereas NMN and NR are more efficacious in raising levels in the brain. I think we need to do those types of experiments. Yeah. I think with NAD, you need a combination of ingredients to target a different because there's different reasons why the NAD goes down. Some ideas because of the CD38. Others are like the PARPs from a DNA damage. Yeah, DNA damage and inflammation, I think are the two big drivers most likely, right? Yeah. You said, that older individuals don't take up is it, don't have as much transporter of ergothione? Ergothenine transporter? I couldn't tell you the specifics there. I don't know if it's to do with expression of the transporter. Something else to consider, and this is true of the NAD precursors too, is that the gut microbiota substantially influence what ends up getting into the bloodstream. So within the gut, the different NAD precursors that you provide like the NR and the NMN will be metabolized by some bacteria. So it's not like you put any NR in your mouth and then you get a commensurate rise in blood NR. It just crosses the intestinal lining unconverted. That's not the way it works. And it's probably somewhat similar in the case of ergothione. It's probably being metabolized by some of those microorganisms. Mhmm. But, again, do we have clinical research showing that? Not just yet. The Spiegelman paper does indicate, pretty substantial increases in that in the ergothione transporter from exercise. Obviously, it's in animals, but I wonder if if one way around it, one way to maybe increase its bioavailability in the tissues would be through exercise. Take the example of glucose. Mhmm. But it's gonna be true of many different things that active tissues need for optimal function. And it points to the importance of maintaining a healthy lifestyle because that way, in the case of some of these substances, you're gonna get better responses still due to the interaction between them. I don't wanna go into creatine because I suspect that each of us has spoken about creatine ad nauseam at some point. I also have one eye on the clock. We've been going for nearly three hours so far. So with that in mind, are there one or two supplements that you think that we should discuss before we round things out today that will be of special interest to people listening? Something I've noticed that people are really interested in is, collagen peptides. I don't know if you guys have strong opinions on collagen peptides. I wouldn't choose collagen peptides just because I don't think collagen peptides as being a true gero protector. Mhmm. I see them as being something that supports connective tissue health primarily and therefore might have some bearing on your physical appearance and the resilience of some of your tissues. So in particular, your tendons and your ligaments. Yeah. I'm trying to think about targeting the biology of aging per se. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. I agree. I guess, azaxanthin is one thing we mentioned. We didn't go into too much detail, but, yeah. There's the ITP study, extended lifespan by twelve percent. And, there's a nematode study as well that found life extension plus in, the human studies. You have that it helps with inflammation markers, and I think cholesterol markers as well was was one of the things. And, yeah, like, the skin benefits, like, it protects the skin against your irritation, but, yeah, that's more the aesthetic side. I I do like Azoxanthenol quite a lot, and I've become more more like amazed or interested in it. I think it's a great choice. That would have been my choice too. If I think about these supplements, the ones I'm probably most excited about are astaxanthin and ergothioneine for quite different reasons. I recognise that there are very different levels of evidence so far. Astaxanthin has been much better studied. But as you said, it does seem to have positive effects on lots of different outcomes. To add a couple into the mix, another one would be physical performance, and yet another would be reproductive function. And while it extends lifespan, it does seem to target most of these different hallmarks of aging as well. Read into that as much as you will. I don't read too much into that personally. But when you put all that together, plus the fact that it's a natural part of the human diet, It's the pigment that gives salmon its pink color for listeners. It's got an excellent safety profile and it's not particularly expensive. It's a no brainer for a lot of people. And also it's a category of supplements that I'm drawn to, which I see as benefiting adults of all ages from 18 to the great. I wouldn't put some things into that category. I wouldn't put berberine into that category, for instance, But I would put taurine and creatine and ergothioneine and astaxanthin and lutein and zeaxanthin. And the magnitude of those benefits is gonna fluctuate according to how old you are. But I think that there's evidence for all of those different things for people of different ages. Maybe there's the least evidence for ergothione, but it's presence in the diet and the mechanisms shown so far and the potential positive effects on body composition adaptations to exercise training suggests to me that it's gonna be something that benefits young people too. What do you think, Nick? I agree. I don't really have anything on the top of mind that jumps out to me. I think the list that we have is is quite good. We covered a lot. Oh, maybe, omega threes is something that I would throw in there as well, but, we we covered that as well. So yeah. Have you got anything to add there, Nick? To omega threes, you mean? I would say just because if you are taking it yeah, I guess I'll say, omega threes are probably most beneficial for the brain later on in life. I don't think that there's any harm in taking it when you're younger, but I think that the greatest benefit is gonna be later on in life. However, if you're taking it for cardiovascular disease risk, I think that it'd probably be better to take it earlier in life than it would later. I'm not saying that you shouldn't take it later in life. You should just continuously take it, with a little bit of a greater focus on EPA simply because that one seems to have slightly stronger, benefit in relation to cardiovascular disease. And considering that cardiovascular disease, at least the way that we're talking about or at least the way I'm talking about it, is in relation to cholesterol deposition and atherosclerosis and whatnot, as well as some morphological changes in some of the, the heart cells that should be addressed earlier than later because once you already have it, it's really difficult to get that removed that that atherosclerosis. So, yeah, I would, I would throw that in there. But, yeah, Aside from the ones that we already covered, but I think the list, list looks really good. See many others? Nothing that comes to mind immediately, One final question related to supplements. Are there any that haven't been studied in clinical populations yet that you have your eye on as holding special promise? I have a a cheeky response, and I guess I have a real response. I don't Give me cheeky. The cheeky response is, c 15 fats. They're essential. Right? We already know that. Yeah. They're essential. Alright. Essential versus Essential for someone's bottom line. I was just about to say that. Yeah. Aside from that, I I think that something I don't I wouldn't say I have my eye on it, because I'm not that bullish on it, but a lot of other people are. And I I think that there's at least a potential that it could have an effect as urolithin a. I've seen a lot of people discuss it. I've covered some of the studies on it. I'm not that impressed by it, but maybe in the future, we'll see some better studies. Basu (3five 50: That's interesting. I've looked at the studies as well and it's done by the company that owns the patent timeline nutrition. And from that study, the only thing I saw was a hamstring torque increase. That was the only significant effect. It didn't increase grip strength and upper body strength. And I think the endurance thing, that was the kind of funny part that they, measured the endurance in the middle of the study, right? In the middle and in the end. And in the middle of the study, I think it was something like three months or something, the urothelin A group, Dc endurance increased compared to placebo. But by the six months, it decreased and it was like no difference between placebo. So I say like, yeah, if you wanted to increase your endurance by taking urothelin A, you just have to wait six months until the end of the study. But, yeah, maybe it helps with, like, the lower body strength maybe, but upper body strength, even their own studies, the two of them, they found, no effect on that specific. Yeah. Read those studies as well and been entirely underwhelmed by the data that have been published so far. I think a really important point to emphasize here is the disparity between the cost of urolithin a as mitopur and the results reported in those studies so far. It's a 100 per month, sir. It's a $125 for a month's supply. However, the month's supply is a fifteen day supply. If you look at that second study, there were two different experimental groups. One had five hundred milligrams, one had a thousand milligrams. Two pills is five hundred milligrams. You gotta take four pills to get one thousand milligram dose, which tended to statistical significance in a couple of the outcomes they looked at as well as the effect on hamstring talk. That means a $125 for a fifteen day supply for something that's having negligible effects. And I think the mechanisms are interesting, so people are interested in it primarily is something that's influencing mitophagy, the removal of dysfunctional mitochondria. And clearly, people aren't necessarily that good at making urolithin a themselves. It's a so called postbiotic. It's something that your gut bacteria can produce if you consume the laser tannins from certain foods like pomegranates, but a lot of people don't make that conversion very effectively. And clearly supplementing urolithin a can increase blood levels and therefore bypass that issue. But I'm just really unimpressed by the data. I'm not sure if there's a single ingredient supplement that has clinical research published on it that, at that price point, has been so unremarkable in the clinical effects. Not to throw your suggestion under the bus, Nick. I don't I don't mean to do that. I'm not ruling out entirely, but it's not one that I'm personally gravitating to. Yeah. I think they haven't, you know, studies like, you know, metabolic syndrome or, like, these chronic diseases. Maybe there might be effects, but for the exercise, unless, you know, you're wanna increase hamstring torque. And they did find changes in proxies of information and mitochondrial function based on the biochemical analyses they included in those studies. So I'm not saying that it's not having effects. It clearly is. I just think that the cost to benefit ratio makes no sense for anybody apart from Yeah. Linnaeus or Binnaeus. I think I think the price is so high because they own the patent and and they bar against anyone who tries to make their own urothene with, lawsuits. Just to add one suggestion, there's a flavonoid called nebulitin that I think is really interesting. Have you guys come across that? No. It's found in citrus peel. The first time it came on my radar was a paper that Joe Tacker actually, who's a scientist I've got a huge amount of respect for, published some work where they used an unbiased chemical screen to look at different natural products that might affect the scaling clock, the molecular clock that ticks in all of our cells and programs the daily schedule of events in those cells. And Nabilitin appeared as top hit. And then they looked at its effects on the clock and its effects on mice during aging. They basically found that it has a bunch of positive effects on metabolic health in particular that are mediated by the clock because they found that if they genetically tampered with the clock and its function, then they abolished the effects of the nebulity. And then other studies have also found positive effects on things like gut function, and immune function, and neuroprotection. And so given that I've got my bias that clock dysfunction is one of the hallmarks of aging, it's It's just that people aren't recognizing that yet, and that's something that we need to target as well. Mhmm. Which we can do a little bit. I think a few of these different substances that we've discussed today are affecting the skating clock. There's evidence for that with ergothioneine. There's very strong evidence for that with lithium. Lithium is one of the more potent chronobiotics. At trace doses, that's unlikely the case, though, and we were speaking about trace doses earlier. But when you put all that together and the effects of nabilitan on the clock, I think it's really interesting in part because unlike many of the things that we've discussed, the effects of nebulitin on the clock seem to increase as animals get older, as their clocks function worse and worse. And so it could be that it's becoming more and more beneficial later in life when animals need it the most. So we've just got one eye on that. So I also suspect that it's gonna be something that we find to be safe because it's just in citrus peel. Intuitively, it makes sense that provided the dose is reasonable, it's probably gonna be benign. Like, the energy booster also act on the circadian clock. Right? The zircon They do through the sirtuins. They should do. And and AMPT, one of the enzymes that you mentioned, which the rate limiting enzyme in that particular pathway is clock controlled and ties into one of the feedback loops within the molecular clock. They surely will, and and that brings up the point that we need to look at the optimal time at which to take these. It might just be that you need to take them at a consistent time of day if you wanna maintain a healthy clock, but it could be that there is a particular phase within the circadian cycle at which it's best to take it. Watch this space. So it's been an absolute pleasure, guys. Thank you for your time. In closing, where would you like to point people? I know that you each have lots of different projects that you're involved in. All very exciting. Yeah. I'm I'm Seamland on YouTube and, Instagram as well. Twitter. Everywhere, Seamland. Yeah. Thanks for, thanks for having us. This is a blast. Anytime it's It's not often that you get to have, three science based people that that get to, sit here and nerd out and discuss all the science at length. So it's a it's a rarity and it's a lot of fun. So thanks. You can find me on Physionic. Just type in physio and then n I c, and you'll find me. First on the Oh, that's Nick. Is like physio Nick, or is it physionic? Or how am I pronouncing that one? Because I see what you did there. There's no h. Yeah. No. There's no h.