HMB is a supplement that's seen quite a lot of resurgence in popularity, because it might help to build muscle and strength. However, there are some people saying that HMB can actually replace exercise or that you need to exercise less while taking HMB. In this video, I'm going to break down what does the research actually say about HMB and whether or not you should supplement it. HMB or beta hydroxy beta methylbutyrate is a byproduct of the amino acid Leucine. Leucine is the key amino acid responsible for muscle protein synthesis that builds muscle. You need a specific amount of leucine, which for most people is two point five to three grams to trigger muscle protein synthesis. However, the metabolism of leucine creates HMB, which might also have effects on reducing protein breakdown. There is research that taking HMB before exercise blunts the rise in muscle damage and protein breakdown from exercise even in trained individuals. HMB before resistance training appears to result in lower cortisol and higher testosterone after the training than placebo, which means the body experiences less wear and tear from exercise thanks to HMB's anti catabolic effects. HMB also stimulates muscle protein synthesis, which means you're more likely to be in a net positive anabolic state resulting in more muscle. All of this would indicate that HMB is amazing for muscle growth. You would build more muscle while taking HMB with all things being equal. But this is where things get a bit more controversial. In the early twenty tens, there were several studies published by doctor Wilson and colleagues that showed that supplementing HMB resulted in greater increases in muscle mass and loss of fat mass compared to injecting testosterone. That's just bonkers. An over the counter supplement outperforming steroids. The results of these studies were taken with a lot of skepticism by the scientific lifting community, and nobody really thinks that HMB is better than steroids. So there was probably some sort of shenanigans going on with these studies. However, it doesn't mean that HMB is useless or that it wouldn't help with muscle growth. Supplementing HMB has been seen to increase muscle mass and strength in untrained and elderly people, but the effects are much smaller in already trained and advanced trainees. A 2020 meta analysis of 11 randomized controlled trials on 18 to 45 year olds saw that supplementing three grams a day of HMB didn't result in greater lean mass or strength compared to placebo. HMB was seen to have some benefits in people eating less than 1.6 grams per kilogram of protein which is still more than what average people consume. What it means is that HMB makes up for suboptimal protein intake because if you were on a high protein intake you would get adequate amounts of HMB from your diet. There is also an age related effect of HMB with older individuals seeing greater benefits than younger individuals. A 2025 meta analysis of 21 randomized controlled trials on adults over the age of 50 saw significant improvements in muscle mass, strength, and gait speed from taking three grams a day of HMB for at least twelve weeks. Doses below three grams and shorter than twelve weeks were less effective. What's been consistently found is that HMB supplementation reduces muscle wasting in older individuals. This makes HMB a potential therapeutic option for sarcopenia and other conditions of frailty. With age, you see a decline in muscle mass and muscle strength starting in your mid thirties already. Let's be honest, most of this decline is because of disuse, not lifting weights, but it's also driven by aging. As you get older, your body becomes less sensitive to the muscle growth effects of eating protein. That's why a young person needs only two point five grams of Leucine to trigger muscle protein synthesis, but a person in their eighties might need twice that amount. Older people need more protein to maintain the same amount of muscle not to mention build it. Supplementing H and B is a way to achieve a more positive anabolic state. You trigger more protein synthesis then you break down. This can help you to maintain muscle on a lower protein intake and for all the people who struggle to build muscle, it will also help to maintain that muscle. You should still lift weights and eat enough protein but adding H and B to the mix can help those who struggle with frailty or sarcopenia. I actually used H and B for several years myself and indeed noticed some benefits. Now, you might wonder why because I'm not old, I don't have low muscle mass, I don't eat a low protein diet so why did I take it? Well, I took it because I saw some of the studies and I thought it might help me to also build more muscle. However, my situation was a bit more special because I was also doing one meal a day in a minute of fasting And I was taking HMB in the morning in a fasted state. Fasting is a state characterized by higher muscle protein breakdown. And taking HMB apparently reduces that, resulting in a higher positive protein balance. So whenever I take HMB, I do notice much better muscle retention and muscle growth because of that reason. If I were to eat three, four, five meals a day with protein then I probably wouldn't see that effect. Alright, let me give you a summary. Should you take h and b? H and b reduces muscle protein breakdown and has been seen to increase muscle mass and strength under specific conditions. Number one, you're eating a suboptimal protein intake which is less than 1.6 grams per kilogram per day. Number two, you're experiencing muscle wasting due to some medical condition or just aging. Number three, you're a beginner to lifting weights. And number four, you're over the age of 50, especially over the age of 80. HMB does reduce muscle breakdown and it can accelerate recovery even for trained individuals, but it's not going to result in significant gains if you eat high protein and you're lifting weights. The best time to take HMB is either in a fasted state or before exercise, and the optimal dose is one point five to three grams a day. There are two types of HMB, HMB calcium and HMB three acid. HMB calcium has about 13% calcium, So three grams would provide four hundred milligrams of calcium, which is a significant amount and it can be harmful for cardiovascular health. However, HMB free acid is faster acting and it's cleared faster. So you should only take it before exercise. Whereas h and b calcium can be taken in the fasted state without exercise. Overall, I do think that h and b is useful especially for the elderly people or those who are suffering from malnutrition, frailty, or sarcopenia. Or maybe if you're doing some sort of extended inward fasting. If you want to know the top 15 supplements that are most effective for health, then check out this video next.