But if supplementing with vitamin d, well, it does help with the immune system and help fixing your gut, but it doesn't give you all the hormonal benefits that d three actually does from the sun natural light. Yeah. So don't just fill up your gauge. It's almost like grabbing the fuel gauge and dragging it up to being full. It's still gonna run out of fuel. Yeah. There's more than just the building blocks, you know. Yeah. You get the building blocks from collagen that then is used for making collagen and for collagen turnover, but there's some other effects on specific, like, the immune system and macrophages as well. Tim, welcome to the show. Thanks for having me, man. Yeah. We were just discussing that you have, like, exciting times ahead of you with, the Health Optimization Summit as well launching in The States in, from now. It's, like, one week from now. So, April in Austin, Texas where I'll also be there and, a lot of other different speakers will be there as well. So, yeah, how do you feel about it? Super excited, from this little event in The UK going to Austin, Texas. And we're I think we're gonna be bigger in year one in US than we were in year four in England. So, yeah, it's really, really fun because we're gonna be helping a lot more people and bringing a lot of the cool paleo tribe back together again. It's awesome. Yeah. Yeah. Just if people are wanna join at the last moment, then, yeah, check the link in the description for the link for that. But, yeah, today we're doing a Q and A. We asked both of our peep followers on Instagram to do, like, a to ask us questions. And, one of the first questions we got was, how do you get sleep when your mind is racing and you can't switch off? Yeah. Okay. So I'll take my my angle on this one if you may if I may, Sim. I mean, this is something I struggled with for many years, and I used to have to take just different sleeping tablets. And I did this on and off for years. And, obviously, it's just a in my opinion, the neurotransmitter imbalance, and that could be from eating the wrong foods later on in the day or having coffee past twelve, 01:00 in the afternoon. And, it could be from watching Netflix or being too stressed or having an argument with your partner or, you know, especially if you're watching Netflix and it's, fighting, killing, or whatever. Your body is in a war zone and not ready to switch off. I used to find that my brain went the moment I laid down, and I found that, eating not far after sunset was perfect. And actually and I keep it here, and I'm traveling right now. So this is why I'm sitting on the bed in my hotel room, but I always carry vitamin b three, so niacin with me. The flush kind, because I find that this really helps calm down, adrenaline and, helps the brain all the neurotransmitters calm. So I take fifty milligrams, which really helps. And, also, another one that I take as well, which is fantastic, just in case I've had coffee during the day, is l theanine. I mean, this is l theanine is bloody fantastic. So those two good supplements, but I don't rely on the supplements. They're more like the bonus, the last, you know, 20%, whereas the food winding down and things are the most important thing. And then the obvious one, which is blue light. Mhmm. Blue light. Our body thinks it's still midday if we're playing with our phone in bed like this. So your body's thinking, you shouldn't sleep now because there's predators around. It needs to be nighttime where everything's sleeping. So getting a decent set of blue blocking glasses is, you know, really, really beneficial. Wearing them for at least at least an hour before bed and not taking them off when you brush your teeth and getting blue light in your eyes again because that kinda interrupts the whole thing and confuses your body even more. Yeah. What do you think? Yeah. Yeah. Like, I think the mental distress or some, I guess, something stressful mentally will be one of the biggest reasons why some people, you know, especially when it comes to the racing mind and, rumination and racing thoughts. So, sometimes it's like neurotransmitter imbalance that, you know, or some underlying chronic stress that, keeps that anxiety increased or elevated. But at other times, yeah, it's just you, like, read some bad news or got a bad email or something like that that, keeps you, you're just thinking about that thing and, ruminating about it. So, you know, it's kind of tricky. And what I found is that certain, like, supplements, yeah, can help with that L theanine and GABA or Ashwagandha or, certain few others. But, you know, if with sleep is if you're like struggling to fall asleep, you've been bed in like thirty minutes, then one of the best things is to just get up and go somewhere else and do a little bit, you know, something else. You're wearing your blue blockers and things like that, but, try to get out of the bed for at least a little bit because then, you know, you're gonna disassociate some of that bed with the rumination at least. And, you know, you might do something else. Read a book or something and you'll get sleepy naturally by doing that. So that's like one that's what I usually do if I'm like, you know, twisting in the bed and not being able to fall asleep for whatever reason then I'll just okay, I'll just get it get up and do something else for a little bit, maybe, like, an hour, or half an hour, some and, that usually is enough. And then I go back, and then I'm, like, already a bit more tired. Yeah. That's super super interesting point. I think that, you know, one thing that I'd throw in with that is depending on your I don't know if you've done the Braverman test or not, Sam, but I'd I'd I'd really be interested to know what your results were on that. I'm, choline dominant, acetylcholine dominant, and then secondary is dopamine. So, obviously, you know, brain and neurotransmitters, obviously, specific ones are most powerful for me, which is why things like paracetam, anoracetam, acetylcholine, and most of the nootropics seem to work really well with me be just because it's my predominant neurotransmitter. Mhmm. So I think, you know, if someone is dopamine dominant or acetylcholine dominant in their neurotransmitters, then, you know, they do have harder time switching their brain off at night, such as, you know, a friend of mine, Maria, who is GABA dominant highly GABA dominant. You know, she's in another reality. A lot of the time, very chilled and, you know, takes a breath. For her, falling asleep is a completely different ballgame. So, you know, have you done your Bremen test, Sim? No. No. I reckon I'm doing it. It's interesting. I think I might have like some blend. Like I'm dopaminergic in some things but, governergic in other things. Next question. Thoughts on agmatine sulfate, which is a supplement. And, I guess, you know, my quick research on it was that it's not really there's not a lot of human trials with it. It is like a form of, like, arginine that, may have, like, benefits on, like, blood pressure and vasodilation, etcetera. But, similar to arginine. But, yeah, there's not a lot of, like, human studies on it. So right now, there's no way to say it if it does have any effects in humans, and not to mention, like, the what what kind of a dose it would be. Yeah. I mean, yeah, all I know about it, same as, you know, as we discussed, is that, arginine, yeah, is, really good for nitric oxide, increasing, whereas this is really good for modulating nitric oxide. So, you know, I think I mean, it really depends on your goals. And as you know with arginine before gym sessions, you know, and and it's on a lot of the the pre workout things to help. I mean, there's two thoughts. There's two two thoughts on this, is it? Yeah. It really works, or it it doesn't seem to do much at all. I don't know what your thoughts are on the whole arginine thing, but, I mean, I For exercise performance, for sure, like, there's evidence, you know, both citrulline and arginine. Yeah. Does it have any, like, cardiovascular benefits? It's hard to say. Like, depends on the person. But, you know, the increased blood flow, increased increased nitric oxide tends to lower blood pressure, in people. Yeah. Next question. When I eat, my face flashes red and it gets hot. What do you think is the cause? I'd love to take this one first if that's okay, mate. So it's something that I typically, faced most of my life, and I look quite red light now. I mean, it's partly the lighting, but partly because I'm in Miami right now and, been getting a little bit of sun every day. But, typically, I found through my journey in people along, along it, when you get red in the faces, typically, after red wine and if your nose goes stuffy or aged meats or something like that, it's it can be a histamine reaction. So for instance, if you've had vegetables in the fridge for a couple of days as well, histamine levels go up. Now you would say, well, I'll just avoid histamine foods. Well, why does it affect some people, and why doesn't it affect other people? Well, it can be down to several reasons, but two genes specific or snips are h one and h two receptors. I'm unlucky enough to have both, so it's down regulated for both of me. So histamine becomes an issue. Now when you combine that with, imbalanced gut microbiome from having antibiotics, maybe a stressed liver because of, you know, contraceptive pill or, you know, if you're taking something like Accutane in the past where your liver's struggling as a result, plus having one or the other or both of the genes, then you'll find that you get a a histamine reaction where your skin flushes. There are things many things that you can do. The first one for anyone with histamine issues. So if you wake up with a migraine after having certain foods or even bananas and avocados are actually my two worst triggers of all. I have a supplement called DAO, which is an enzyme that breaks down histamine in in the digestive process, and I take a pee based one twice a day. And that really deals with my histamine on an ongoing basis. However, the long term fix is obviously working on your gut and your digestive system on the assumption you don't have both gene mutations. The way you can do this is you can do a DNA test. There's various out there. DNA, company is one of them. SelfDecode is another. Omnos in The UK have it as well. And you can look at the h one and the h two genes to see, you know, if you have those mutations. You know, so what you can do about it, DAO enzyme is a great one twice a day, because of the half life of DAO enzyme. I also take, something called ketotifen, which is, an antihistamine, one of the OG antihistamines, and I take that before bed, which helps calm my nervous system, deactivates mast cell, and, and helps me sleep as well as deals with histamine on an ongoing basis. I am a unique fairly unique case for myself just because of the double gene mutation. Do you have anything, on that, Sam? Because I'd love to know if you know something I don't. No. Like, food sensitivities are something I'm very foreign with because I don't have any, like, food sensitivities myself. And, I've, yeah, not, like, researched them that much. And it's very, like, complicated with the immune system and the gut. But, yeah, I mean, like, my wife, for example, Inka, she does have food sensitivities. She does react to certain foods, yeah, like fermented foods or dairy or, yeah, like aged foods. If they've been sitting in the fridge for too long, they they can have, yeah, like some negative effects on her, like, mood or well-being or skin issues. Yeah, like I could I could eat, like, you know, ten days old milk or something. But and have no, like, problems with that. But, yeah. Like, what what she well, like, interesting thing for her, like, it was, like, the mold illness, apparently, also had, like, a lot of effect on the immune system and autoimmunity and the food sensitivities. Like, she, started treating the mold illness with, you know, different things like elimination diet plus, like, she got prescribed this naldrexone and the colostridamine that also medications that help with that. And it it appear appears to work. Like, it she can tolerate, like, a lot more foods than, in the in the past. So, yeah. There's a lot of different things. But, you know, she's not, like, completely sold with it. So, Yeah. I mean, I would I would definitely look at her genes actually and see if she's got the h one or the h two or both, because that would tell you about what you need to do in long term. But, otherwise, if it's if she has intolerances, it's an indicator that the gut is leaking something into the system Mhmm. Yeah. And still needs repairing. In fact, there there's a new Heal Like Wolverine peptide capsule that LevelUp Health have just brought out, which is fantastic for this. So it's a capsule that obviously breaks down in the gut, which helps fix your gum lining because it's BPC one five seven in it as well as various other things. So I found that that's pretty in pretty good. That's probably where I would start with that. But the colostridamine, by the way, is such a flipping fantastic drug, actually. So it's the pharmaceutical binder that was actually called cholestyramine because it's about, helping with cholesterol levels, actually. That's why it was Yeah. Developed. However, the byproduct is it's a very good binder for mold toxins specifically. And people that don't have ongoing exposure to mold actually get cleared out very, very quickly using col cholestyramine. So if you've tried taking antifungals and, you know, been on the candida diet and still have gut issues and then cholestyramine is, like, you know, the creme de la creme of things to fix this. So, yeah, it's a really great shout that she's had that. Yeah. It's it's been working very well for her. I wanna take a quick break to let you know that you can now get my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. It contains 24 chapters ranging from the biology of aging to all the major chronic diseases such as heart disease, kidney disease, neurodegeneration, and I also cover over 70 clinically relevant biomarkers for chronic diseases and their optimal ranges. You can get the book from the link in the description. Next question, NMN, are they safe, or is it safe long term? I guess, yeah, I can take that. NMN, you know, generally has so NMN doesn't have, like, an established this GRAS status. So they generally recognize the safety status by the FDA, whereas, nicotinamide riboside, it does. Now I think, you know, they're both, like, pretty equally safe from the studies so far, but there's no, like, yeah, like long term studies, on, you know, neither of those. Based on the current, like, studies, clinical trials on NMN, like, it's well tolerated, it, you know, raises NAD levels and doesn't have any, like, serious side effects. But, you know, the benefits also are kind of, shortcoming. Like, there's not, like, a massive improvement when it comes to, like, metabolic health or some, physical function or those kind of things, for both NMN and NR. So, yeah. It's pretty safe. We know if the safety in the long term is the same, but, yeah. In the short term, it appears to be quite safe. Do you have anything to add? I don't. I mean, I remember listening to a podcast with you, and I think it was Christopher Shade talking about this once upon a time. And I was just thinking, wow. These guys really know 10 times deeper than me on this topic. It was actually quite insane. So now I've got nothing to add nothing to add at all, to be honest with you. Yeah. We're gonna, yeah, add this next question, which is that does NMN cause excess methylation and increase homocysteine? So that's, like, the idea that the NMN and other energy boosters, they deplete metal donors if you take them alone, which actually hasn't been seen, to be so, like in some one clinical trial they actually saw that a large dose of NMN in Parkinson's patients didn't affect methylation and methyl donors at all. So I wouldn't yeah. Maybe if you wanna be safer, you wanna combine it with some methyl donor like TMG, or something else. But, current based on their studies right now, there's no fear that it's going to, like, deplete the methyl donors, either. Trimethylglycine is a fantastic one to add in. I think if you specifically, if your diet is not particularly good, if you don't eat a lot of vegetables or things like beetroot or whatever, and if your homocysteine levels are high, then you probably got one of the MTHFR or methylation genes. So trimethylglycine is, you know, pretty much a magic bullet for you. And so you have her homocysteine trimethylglycine and bring that down pretty damn quickly. So, yeah, it's an interesting point because if it don't if it did use up, methyl donors or whatnot, trimethylglycine trimethyl three is the perfect the perfect methyl donor. And I I mean, I take it again before bed, you know, anywhere from one thousand to three thousand milligrams because I have the MTHFR gene, actually several variations of it. Yeah. So, yeah, it's a great one of my favorite supplements of all time, actually. Yeah. It's it's great. I took it, four grams for lowering homocysteine as well. I don't know my why mine was elevated. Maybe it was some I speculated it might have been like the mold effect, which I wasn't, like, feeling at all, but in my homocysteine it was always slightly like like 10 or 11. I took, homo the TMG, four grams. It got me to, like, nine point five or something, but it didn't work beyond that. And what got me to five, which is, like, the optimal amount, was, HBOT. So hyperbaric. I did, like, 20 sessions of HBOT and, that actually, my wife as well, she saw her homocysteine go as well from, like, ten to five and mine as well from ten to five from, a few, a few months of a HVOD. Yeah. Next question. CoQ 10, is it worth it? I mean, I think for people with fibromyalgia or chronic fatigue or some of these things, it's one of the fundamental pieces of the puzzle for your mitochondria or your energy production. And I think it can be amazing. For some people, it does nothing at all, almost nothing at all. In fact, my father's, my father's mentor was the the person that isolated CoQ ten originally, which is a fantastic thing about recently, which is super interesting. Yeah. I mean, I I I think it's a piece of a big puzzle. It's not something you should go in and say, oh, my energy isn't great. Let's just start with CoQ ten. It should be, you know, let's look at the whole the whole system. I mean, to your point about the hyperbaric, just really quite an interesting point around homocysteine and how it's relevant is that sometimes it's just the basic element of oxygen that helps the system run better, and you don't need a supplement. So I would explore the avenues of why you think you need CoQ10 in the first place. Are you doing breath work? Are you nose breathing or mouth breathing? You know, do are you snoring through the night? Are you drinking properly, hydrating properly of the right minerals? You know? Are you actually exercising? And all of these things before you wonder, you know, oh, I need more energy. Because I think a common misconception is and I I had this for many years myself, to be completely honest, was I was so fatigued and knackered. I didn't wanna use energy exercising because I thought I'd be in a deficit, even more in a deficit. But in fact, when you start getting the body moving, it starts adapting and starts creating more energy. And then your hunger goes up, and you start putting more decent food in it. And it's the opposite of a negative spiral. So I think, you know, adding in co q ten is nice, you know, if you're already optimized and still need more. But and that that pairs very well with PQQ, which I found to be, you know, probably the best overall energy supplement I've ever taken. What do you think? Yeah. Like, you know, CoQ10 supports mitochondrial function, and, you know, exercise increases mitochondrial biogenesis and mitochondrial density. So exercises for sure, like, bigger, bolder here. But but based on the reach research, the CoQ10 does support, like, people with fatigue, in the clinical trials. So it is, you know, proven to work for that. Interestingly, it does also help with people with heart failure, which is, you know, also characterized by energy deficit or energy problems. So, yeah. Those those are the main populations that, might benefit the most. In exercise performance, there's, like, studies that Crocodone can increase VO2 max as well. Not like, to a very large degree, but, still, like people who exercise, they wanna support their energy and get, like, the squeeze the everything out of the VO two max, then, that will be one of the supplements to add as well in in the list. Yes. And you say that about the VO two max. I just wanna touch on that. So when I was at the OIO clinic, last year, January, February, I did the VO two max. And the only thing that I changed since my previous one was my nose breathing where I didn't think I've been doing it significantly more. And I was running it full pal up to fifteen minute mark. Wow. Nose breathing, not mouth breathing at all. Literally measured. And I I think I was four points behind you, and, you know, I think there's there's a sixteen years difference between us. So I was pretty excited about that. So it's like, you know, again, it it highlights how getting the fundamentals of the basics right before chucking all of these supplements in because sometimes your body doesn't need more supplements. It's just gonna overburden it versus giving it actually what it needs. Yeah. And HPOD can also help with that, the VioSuremax, I think, and, you know, just the oxygenation. Well, sure. I mean, if you just touch on that, I really it's interesting topic. I discussed this the other day. Actually, I was on a flight to Miami, and, I had my air quality meter on the plane and my EMF reader on the plane sitting on the on the table. And the guy behind me, two seats behind, he said, what are you doing? And I told him. I said, you know, why are you asking? He said, well, actually, I work for Airbus, and, it's super interesting to find why you're checking oxygen levels and carbon dioxide levels. And then I told him about hyperbaric and how, you know, obviously, the increased atmospheric pressure can help us dissolve more oxygen into the blood, but lack of oxygen, high carbon dioxide means that we're not as oxygenated in the first place. So it's kinda like a push and pull. And, I think, you know, why why is it good that we nose breathe? It's because we breathe less, which means that we can deal with carbon dioxide better, which means we then get oxygen into the cell better because carbon dioxide helps the oxygen get into the cell. So hyperbaric bypasses a lot of that by getting oxygen straight into the cell. So if hyperbaric works for someone particularly well, it's often because they're not oxygenated enough, which comes from actually not breathing measured enough. And that means usually a lack of exercise or a deficiency that's built up over time. So my background can help. So I love love that you touched on that, actually, because it's super interesting area of where, you know, kind of the devil is in the detail. Mhmm. But it's a it's a really good place to start. Really good place to So we should we should, like, make an airline where you're breathing oxygen during the flight because you're already under the pressure. Right? So you just need the oxygen in the chain in the in the cabin. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. I mean, what he said was and and, obviously, he didn't know it to extreme detail, but he did say, we do know from on our planes that we can have less oxygen because it's higher altitude. But with higher pressure, it means that we're oxygenated at a certain level. But the thing is is when the carbon dioxide is too high and it's not bringing fresh air in and it's recirculating, then, obviously, it makes it a bit it makes dirty air, and that means that we get more colds or flus when we're on a flight. There is an element of clean air technology going into a lot of Boeings now, I hear, which actually brings outside of cabin air in, with higher levels of oxygen and better pressure. So the airline hostesses that I was talking to actually said that they don't really get jet lag in the same way that they used to since applying that. So, again, we'll be piece of the map. That's why. Yeah. Yeah. In the future, we'll have it. Next question. What do you think about a study where omega three slowed aging? And I think they're referring to this recent study by Steve Horath where, omega three supplementation was seen to lower the biological age scores and, slower speed of aging by the do not aim pace test as well. And my opinion is that, yeah, like, you know, mechanistically it makes sense. Omega threes are, like, so essential for just healthy aging and healthy bodily functions for heart health, heart health, brain health, and, other things. And, but but at the same time, it is not, like, definite proof in the sense that test themselves are with, some problems. And, the technology of the measuring the biological age isn't, like, that advanced yet. It's, ahead of the the hype is ahead of the, like, the measurements at the moment. But, you know, besides that, omega three is still you would, you know, benefit great most people would benefit from from them. Oh, we're I mean, we're so deficient in omega three these days compared to omega sixes, which nearly everyone I see tests are out of whack. There's something interesting that doctor Jack Crews once said, regardless of your opinion on Jack and his stuff. He once said, and this really resonated with me, he was like, the DHA is the only lipid that is able to convert sunlight into a DC current. And so if you think about that, if you're deficient in DC, let's say, direct current electricity, your body's gonna be overburdened and needing more energy. So if you're low in omega threes, for instance, then how are you gonna convert sunlight into energy as well? So it's all, again, pieces in with that. And then if you're low in energy, how is your longevity gonna survive? You know? How are you gonna be Sure. Good longevity if your energy is low? You need to be getting the basics. And, again, omega three from diets natural diets is significantly easier than getting it from unnatural diets because it's much higher in omega six, isn't it? So, again, it it kind of pieces into the whole longevity thing. Are you getting the basics right? Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. Next one, optimal asexanthin dosage, four milligrams or more. Is there any need to stop taking it? So I've tested this. I went to ninety six milligrams a day Oh, really? Three months. In fact, Joe Cohen did the same. I think he did it at 48, I think he said. I think, as to something, it's one of the most fantastic, things that you can do to protect yourself and some from the inside out. In fact, Joe McCullough talked about it many years ago back 2016, I think it was. And it's what baby flamingos eat to make them pink. But it's also really, really high highly powerful antioxidant and, yeah, reduces inflammation quite significantly. And I found that in terms of sun exposure that I could cope with at higher UV levels, and I'm very prescriptive with it. I have an app on my phone to measure it wherever I am. At all times when I'm out in it, I found that having astaxanthin almost, you know, 50% more time in the sun without, you know, but not burning because I won't get to the point of burning. Really? So I think it's such a fantastic thing to have. And also, I've noticed that, Nordcode, they have an omega three supplement fish oil, but they actually have astaxanthin in it to stop it oxidizing. So, therefore, you don't have rancid fish oil. So I I'm I'm a big fan of it, and I think the dose you know, you can start on three, six, nine, twelve, you know, twenty four, thirty six, forty eight, and test it depending on how sensitive your skin is and and what you want it for. But, there is a there is a thing within the supplement industry, though, if you actually look at how much astaxanthin is in there, they they say, say, twelve milligrams of which x milligrams is actually astaxanthin, so you have to look very carefully if you are buying it. Yeah. Yeah. I agree. Like, it's very potent for, yeah, protecting against UV radiation. And there are actually, like, clinical trials in humans and that it helps with improving, like, photo damage, photo photo aged skin in humans and, potentially, like, like some, wrinkles as well. The dosage in dose is like six to twelve, is the kind of a range which, yeah, I think you can you can start with that. Four milligrams, I think, provides benefits as well, but the optimal is more like six to twelve, if you wanna, like, micromanage it. Yeah. Big fan. Next question. What would be the best way to increase free testosterone levels fast to become superhuman ability? Yeah. Well, so, like, free testosterone is like the bioactive form of testosterone. And it's, one third of it is bind to what's called sex hormone binding globulin, SHBG, and two thirds is bind bound to albumin. And SHBG usually rises, you know, for various reasons because of aging. With age it increases. With certain other, like, hormonal imbalances it increases. But, like, for most people, average people, is gonna be because of energy restriction or some low thyroid or, like, calorie restriction. Those things tend to raise SHBG plus carbohydrate restriction. So they find is that, the low carb, high protein diets increase SHBG which then results in lower free testosterone levels. Whereas adequate carbohydrate intake, something like 40% carbs, appears to be optimal for the lowest SHBG, production. So and it actually even applies to specifically, like, high glycemic carbs as well. So something like so the quickest way to lower SHBG would be probably to eat like a high carb, high glycemic, meal for a few days. And that would typically, like, increase your thyroid function, increase, the free testosterone lower SHBG levels, you know, granted you, you know, how long or how frequently you would do that depends on your goals and body composition, but, yeah, like some some sort of a healthy incidence spike with high glycemic carbs is actually a very fast way to lower CHPPG. And And another one is, like, the boron, which is, like, a supplement that also lowers s h b g, but that's a more, like, a long term and a smaller effect. Well, I think, just to add on a couple of those is, actually, our colleague friend, Max, from Flowfest, in Germany, he did a thirty day testosterone test every day and was checking the different things that would tank his testosterone or increase it. And, you know, the things that you would think would decrease it such as, you know, sex or masturbation really did very little difference to his daily testosterone rate. And but the thing that tanked it to almost zero on a consistent basis was when he was stressed. So stress literally kills testosterone. So if you're not meditating or and if you have a a stressful job or have stresses and a difficult partner or whatever it may be, this is gonna tank your testosterone more than anything else. So I think, you know, the element again, taking it back to basics is, you know, what can I take or what can I do to increase this? Well, what are you doing that's already decreasing it would probably be, you know, the the better question to start with. There are obviously peptides which I've tested as well. So I was on TRT for quite some time and really enjoyed it. But when I wanted to come off of it because fertility was low, using things like HCG or KISS Peptin peptides was fantastic, and it took me from, you know, low fives Mhmm. Up to 25, within ten days. So it's pretty pretty fantastic stuff. So there are peptides you can work with, but I would say, again, decrease stress, improve your meditation, do ten minutes a day minimum, and, and you you probably find that that works as well. Yeah. And, yeah, if you're if you're, like, super lean and super low calorie intake, low carb intake as well, then yeah, that that's just not the environment for optimal, free testosterone. Like, being super lean for men for men is best something like 10% is kind of the sweet spot for for hormones. Next one, magnesium supplements give me anxiety. I googled and I'm not the only one. Why is this? Do you know that or have you encountered anything with that? I don't know. Well, if you think about this, the mechanism for anxiety can often be gut related. And, many people that have IBS or gut issues actually have a lot of anxiety, and it kinda starts in the gut, and then it goes up to your mind and your brain's on there. And I think this is probably because if you're worried about what's gonna happen, where you are, if there's a toilet nearby, that also increases anxiety. So people that have more balanced microbiome typically have less anxiety. Also, if you have the MTHFR gene, not to go on about it too much, but people that have the MTHFR gene or variation of MTRR or COMT, often have increased levels of anxiety, which comes from neurotransmitter imbalance. So things like trimethylglycine or methylfolate actually helps with that very quickly. The reason why magnesium might be at play here is because actually magnesium is, not an irritant. That's the wrong word. It helps speed up gut motility. And, again, that can play with the neurotransmitters and also play with your mind in that regard. Typically, though, the right magnesium form will actually help calm the brain and help calm you down because magnesium helps helps the body relax. Potassium helps it tighten. This is where the heart pumps from the magnesium and potassium balance, which is why it's important to have more magnesium. So I would look at things like heart rate variability, to see if your heart rate, variability is quite high or low, what your diet would be like if you are having enough of natural magnesium, and maybe try magnesium IV, at a clinic and see if that gives you anxiety. Because if it doesn't, when you have it IV, it's not the magnesium. It's the digestive system. So that's probably what I would connect it to. What what do you think, Steve? Yeah. It's kind of interesting. There might be other gut gut, issues, might be there. The second thing that magnesium can affect is, like, the kidney function. So, like, people with poor kidney function, they have, you know, problems excreting not only, you know, sodium and other electrolytes, but also magnesium. So if you're kind of taking more supplemental magnesium, then it might not get excreted by the kidneys or there's some, like, inflammatory response from there. So it's, yeah, not specifically I don't wouldn't know, like, the specific mechanism for there. For the for the, like, brain, like, the best bioavailable oral magnesium is the magnesium l threonate. So you could try that. Maybe that because that's more crosses the blood brain barrier, unlike the other magnesiums and, is more bioavailable for the brain. So that could also, like, be something to try. Because, you know, there's different types of magnesium. You might be actually reacting to the type of the magnesium that it's bound to, maybe sulfate or, or, basically cyanate or taurate or something like that. So Fair point. I mean, there is actually only one form of magnesium, and that's magnesium. But because if you've got a periodic table, there's only one magnesium. But it is it's exactly what it's bonded to so the body can absorb it and utilize it. It's actually why I like the brand, upgraded formulas, actually, because it's nano particle magnesium, meaning that it's been broken down. So it's smaller than the cell, so it can get in there easier. And it's not because it's not bonded or bound to a larger, compound. So that actually comes in magnesium chloride and liquid drips, and you can it bypasses the gut straight into basically, it's bypasses the gut straight into, basically, it's almost liposomal, essentially. So upgraded formulas, by Bart and Scott, a friend of ours. I really recommend. In fact, I travel with the potassium, the magnesium, the manganese, the boron, and zinc, all of those, which are the fundamental minerals that I'm usually deficient in. Yeah. Next question, what about choline supplements? What about the choline supplements? So, yeah, like, do you take choline or, not? Well, yes and no. I mean, first of all, choline in eggs. I mean, there's a really interesting, data around how pregnant moms fed choline or lots of eggs, egg yolks, specifically, had higher IQ of children. Now if we look at pretty much every nootropic that's on the market, what does it do? It increases the way the brain uses acetylcholine, either opens up the receptors or gives it more. So that's the common factor in pretty much all nootropics. So having choline is obviously beneficial to that. There are things like Qualia, which I really like Qualia. I think it's probably the longest serving nootropic that I've ever taken, and I'm not saying that for any sponsorship reasons, really was the one that I stumbled across back in, like, 2017 or '18. That's got choline in it and various other things. So I find because my brave of man test shows that I'm acetylcholine dominant choline dominant, obviously, they work specifically well for me. Mhmm. So I'm a big fan of eating lots of it with eggs, you know, two to four eggs a day minimum. I don't care so much about the egg whites, but I do have them. The yolks are the most important part for me. And then supplementing with something like Qualia or one of the other nootropics that have choline in it is good. There are also pharmaceuticals or supplements you can get, which are aniracetam, paracetam, oxiracetam, and, you know, all the racetams, basically, which they all have slightly different effects in terms of brainpower, but they open up the receptors for choline, acetylcholine, and make your brain feel super alert. Not wired, but, you know, super focused. So I actually use choline and anoracetam or paracetam when I when I need my brain, you know, absolutely on point. So I'm a big very big fan. Yeah. I personally am not taking colon supplements, but, yeah, like, the dietary coding is, you know, actually should be con. Or I I think it's, like, conditioning essential, nutrient if I'm not mistaken, for, yeah, like, for the brain and liver health. I guess, I think what has, staved me off a little bit from the choline supplementation is that there's, like, at least choline beta trait, has been seen to, like, raise TMAO levels in, in the gut. And that this TMAO is like a metabolite that, is implic thought to be implicated in, like, heart disease. Now the problem here is that, people with poor kidney function, they also produce more TMA or or they're less able to break it down. So the association isn't, like, that strong. I think it's probably more so that people with kidney disease, have higher TMAO levels, and that that's why the TMAO was associated with the heart disease. But mechanistically, I guess, I'm a bit more cautious with that that I wouldn't want to produce more TMAO, in myself, than needed. But with that being said, like, the so in codeine supplements like alpha GBC, that's, still has, like, some evidence that it helps with the brain function and, cognition. So, and especially the older you get. Like, I think, if I was older, I would personally would consider it a lot more, yeah, to maintain, like, cognitive function for longer. But right now, if and if I'm eating, like, dietary choline from, eggs on a regular basis and other foods, then, yeah, I would be, val like, prioritising it a lot more. Next question. If you take d three, can you get k two from foods, and would overall timing matter? I'll let you know. I'll let you get this one, Sam. Yeah. I mean, you do get k two from a lot of foods, you know. I guess, yeah, like, the timing, like, if you take a d three supplement, then you would probably eat something with k two at the same time, like natto or, egg yolks or, fermented foods or those kind of things. So, yeah, I guess the amounts can be a bit hard to reach. So if you're eating natto, let's say you eat a 100 grams of natto, you're getting, like, a ton of k two, like, a thousand micrograms of k two MK seven. So you probably wouldn't need to do supplement k two at the at that time. But, you know, most d three supplements just have the k two added, in there already. So, it's quite convenient. I mean, it's it's actually really interesting thing, the k d three k two, actually, because, so many people just take d three, and they say, oh, I need my vitamin d levels are low. Vitamin d levels are low. I'm gonna take it, and they don't realize that you have to take it with k two. The simple the simple thing for those that are listening that, you know, want a little bit more detail around that specific question on why it's important to have d three and k two's. Vitamin d moves calcium around the body, you know, one of its main functions, and, vitamin k tells it where to go. So if you taste taking vitamin d three on its own, you're gonna be moving calcium around the body, you know, which is great. You're halfway there. But without the k two, and there's various forms of k two as well, like four and part of mark four and seven, you're not gonna be telling it where to go. So if you want your bones to become stronger, vitamin d three and k two will help. So for instance, my mother had osteopenia, and, we reversed it by using k three and d, k d three and k two. Sorry. And that was within a three month period. So it really shows how this stuff works. So be careful with supplementing it, though, without k two. I think it's madness, actually. Yeah. Definitely. You know, and there's so many good sources of it. But, the other thing is that on d three is, like, if you do have low levels this is one thing that Joe McCullough once told me. He's like, vitamin vitamin d is a marker. It's almost like your gas tank gauge. It tells you how much natural light you're getting. And so if it's super low, you're not getting enough natural light for your skin type. If it's super high, then you are. But if supplementing with vitamin d, well, it does help with the immune system and help fixing your gut, but it doesn't give you all the hormonal benefits that d three actually does from the sun, natural light. Yeah. So don't just fill up your gauge. It's almost like grabbing the fuel gauge and dragging it up to being full. You're still gonna run out of fuel. So bearing in mind that, you know, it's good in winter months in Northern Hemisphere to have, you know, better levels of vitamin d. But the again, you can't really sidetrack having enough natural light for your skin type. Yeah. So example, the highest rate of prostate cancer in the world is with African men in the Northern Hemisphere because they don't get enough sunlight. Supplementing with vitamin d three and and k two, actually brings that down significantly. So it does show how it does help, but it's not the full picture. Yeah. Yeah. Like, you don't get the infrared light and, the other benefits from the sunlight from the supplement. Next question, does too high protein cause urea problems? So usually, you know, urea, uric acid, etcetera, like, they're a marker of, like, kidney issues. But, high protein diets themselves don't, like, cause kidney damage or cause kidney issues. They're more of a like, if you have already existing kidney dysfunction or some suboptimal kidney function, then they can accelerate it. So the it's it's not yeah. The the protein itself is the issue. It's more about who is, you know, consuming the high protein diet. If you have suboptimal eGFR and low statency, then that will be, like the scenario with a poor kidney function. And in that scenario, reducing the protein intake can help to, like, manage manage that to a certain extent. But, yeah, other than that, a high protein diet doesn't really have that problem. Yeah. I mean, I I agree. Again, if you got digestive issues or a leaky gut and things are getting into the bloodstream, it's gonna stress the kidneys. So if you're taking way too many supplements, you're gonna stress the kidneys, especially if your gut's not good. And then that means that your liver may be sluggish, you might wanna look at that. So it has a knock on effect, liver, gut, kidneys, and then, you know, too much protein might find their way in and stress the kidneys. So, you know, in the short term, there are things that, you know, like alpha ketoglucarate, which helps actually bring that down quite well. And so for some people, that works very good, but it's not a long term strategy. It's a short term. I would, again, look at I hate to say it yet again, but the MTHFR or MTRR genes because, again, detoxification, breaking down chemicals, methylate to methylate to break down, could be the reason why you have a leaky gut or any gut issues in the first place, which then spiral down to stress in the kidneys from having too much protein. So yeah. So that's definitely the route I would go down badly. Yeah. And, you know, one thing to manage the kidneys on a high protein diet and reduce the risk of progressing to more, let's say, towards, kidney dysfunction is to increase fiber intake. So fiber actually binds to a lot of this, protein fermentation, byproducts. So if you eat, you know, a lot of protein, you might produce some of these byproducts like TMAO or others, fermentation byproducts. And the fiber just and these plant polyphenols, they, reduce that. So usually, like, you what you see is the, you know, high protein a little like, a higher fiber intake mitigates, yeah, like, a lot of the potential harm on, on the kidneys from, like, a very high protein, diet. Are you saying eat better, eat more fiber, more plants? Eat a balanced diet. Yeah. That's another one. Next question, hay fever remedies. No. Why do you have hay fever in the first place? Again, h one or h two gene that we talked about earlier on for histamine. That's why some people get bad hay fever and some people never get it. For me, it triggered, when I was about eight or nine years old, but I do have the double gene. So natural remedies would be DAO enzyme or propolis as well is also one, which can help stimulate your body so it gets more used to histamines. I say the DAO enzyme is probably the best one of all. Medical pharmaceuticals of histamine, antihistamines can be great, but, again, it does do something, I think, to work on the root cause. So if you look at your genes and see if you got an h one or h two gene, then, you know, DAO enzyme is pretty much the best. And if you don't have those gene those two genes, as a, you know, the if you don't have those two snips specifically and then it's if you got hay fever or or stuffy nose after drinking red wine and things like that, then it's probably just a gut issue that you need to resolve, which stems back to the liver. So it really depends on you as an individual of what your genes are saying. But the fix is actually very okay. As long as you know that it's not a gene one, it's actually very easy to fix in the long run fixing your gut with some of the things we've already discussed. And if it is, gene related, then you can buy the DAO enzyme and try various other things just to support yourself so you don't have to suffer too much. I I reduced mine by probably 90%, in summer months. Mhmm. Wow. Next question. Do you think the benefits of collagen in, randomized controlled trials are because of increased glycine mostly? There is, yeah, like an element of effect from glycine. So collagen is 30%, glycine and glycine supports collagen turnover. There's no, like, specific skin skin, antiaging studies on glycine, but there are for collagen. And there was, like, a mechanistic review from 2020 that looked at, okay, why does collagen have these skin antiaging effects? And they had, like, three mechanisms. They had they had to do with stimulating, like, these fibroblasts providing, precursors to collagen synthesis, and it had to do something with, like, the immune system and the macrophages, from the collagen peptides. So, yeah, there's more than just the building blocks, you know, yeah, you get the building blocks from collagen that then is used for making collagen and for collagen turnover, but there's some other effects on specific, like, the immune system and macrophages as well that is one of the reasons why it appears to be have some of those, benefits. Have you used collagen? I use collagen every single day. In fact, I've got I carry around the bulletproof sachets with me when I'm travelling and have it every day. And I take glycine, actually, four to eight grams split, throughout the day, and I actually add it to my herbal tea because it makes it really sweet. Yeah. So glycine and the collagen, I do on a daily basis without without fail. I mean, I I think when, you know, you break down proteins and amino acids into its basic building blocks, the amino acids, and when you look at how peptides are made in the body, it's obviously it goes protein, amino acids, which are the the building blocks of protein, but then you look in the middle, it's peptides, polypeptides. So those peptides are what we we buy as supplements now, but, basically, it's the body's doing its own natural processes. That's what we're telling it to do with these peptides. So having the right amino acids in the right ratios added into your body helps your body do what it's supposed to do. So I think, you know, there is a fundamental beginning part in terms of the amount of protein and how bioavailable it is and what source it comes from. So I think it all adds to the fine the bigger picture of your body rebuilding itself and giving it the original building blocks that you need. Same with arginine. Exactly the same with arginine. Again, it's just a, you know, an amino acid that, that's really that makes the body do something specific. And that specific task of that specific one is fascia dilation and, to relax blood vessels and things like that. And each different each different one has a different effect. So I like the ratios of collagen. It seems to work well with me, and, I mean, it's keeping me at 46. Alright? I think. Yeah. Like, you know, the peptides can be, so so some of the so the peptide, what's the structure and the small molecular size is what makes them more bioavailable. And, you know, I mean, like, with PPC one fifty seven, for example, it's derived from a natural compound, PPC, but the PPC one fifty seven itself is like a synthetic compound that you can't get naturally. So, yeah, obviously, you wanna get a good diet for sure. But I guess the peptides are you know, I'm I'm quite interested in the future of the peptides, in, health care and longevity optimization. Sure. For sure. I mean, I I love that Gary Brecker did an explanation of it the other day about BPC one five seven, and it was actually so elegantly said. It was fantastic. But, essentially, your body has different signaling from the liver, and it tells the body to do different things. And BPC one five seven as a signal is heal. Heal. Heal. Heal. So if you're supplementing BP one five seven, yeah, it's a synthetic way of getting the body to do something that it usually would do itself. So it increases that. And, having the right amino acids in your diet helps your body do that naturally, or you can supplement, I. E, to give it short term. So yeah. So I I think it's the the future of medicine, I think, are peptides, to be honest, especially when you look at things like, you know, GLP ones and and and whatnot. You know, these are essentially, peptides that of things that happen in the body naturally, but we're now learning to inject them and charge them as drugs. Mhmm. So they they are super effective. And I think the the way the world's going with, you know, Ozempic and things like that right now, it's proving peptides are becoming the future of health. So Mhmm. Interesting to see where it goes. Yeah. Yeah. And last question we have is, using AI for health. Do you use it? How do you use it? How how accurate do you think it is? Well, I love this topic. Obviously, it's the thing of the now. For me, how have I adopted it? Well, I heard actually, Ben Ben Greenfield and I recorded a podcast about a year ago now when ChatGPT started getting its fame, I guess, probably. And he was like, well, you know, it's gonna come to a point where everyone feeds everything into it, and it tells you exactly what's going on with the more knowledge that we get, the better it becomes. And I think there's a lot of systems now linking things in together. I, however, have used it in quite a few different ways, uploading all my blood tests into it. I have an ongoing, project with it. So I'm really keeping an eye on everything so it can cross reference and be pretty accurate. Where I put it to its test initially was before I started trusting it a bit more was this. So I've talked about the MTHFR gene quite a few times today and methylation and why it's so important. It's obviously very important for me, and my family. And, you know, probably forty percent of the population have it in some form. So when I see someone's DNA tests and I see what their MTHFR or MTRR and COMT statuses are, It would usually take me over the space of a couple of days of researching to think to work out what ratios of b twelve, methylfolate, or if it's an inactive b twelve such as hydroxycoveremain or adenosylcalabenamine or trimethylglycine and stuff. So you work out the ratio. So it's quite a lot of work to do that. I've done this probably, well, two dozen times for people, including my mom. So that shows the motivation I'd have behind getting it right. Okay? Now you can upload the DNA results into ChatchiBT and say, what are the supplements that I should supplement with in the right ratios based on these genes? And it comes back, and it is right. Mhmm. So I would say it's fantastic. And the more people that use it and the more data it gets, the more accurate it becomes. In fact, it's pretty, pretty accurate already just in that one instance. So imagine what it's like cross referencing all of your blood tests, all of your DNA, you know, your urine analysis, all your journaling in about your mood or whatever's going on, and it can tell you, okay. So I think it's I think it's fantastic. And, you know, it's a calculator for words, ideas, and possibilities. So we can add things up now and have the answer without having to do all of the thinking like before. Yeah. How do you how do you think it's gonna affect the industry or or everything? Yeah. I I agree, like, with the general sentiment that that, it will be, you know, very powerful in making these connections and cross linking stuff. But, yeah, the, you know, the AI is only as good as the data it gets, you know. So, I think what will happen is, you know, you'll have different models of, these, GPTs using different databases, and you can, you know, probably create your own in the future. Like, okay, you create Tim Gray AI or Gary Bricker AI or Huberman AI, whatever it is, of what would they say and that GPT will come up with that answer. Because, yeah, like, you know you know, the problem is people don't like, not all people will trust, like, some sort of a governmental GPT to tell them, what would be the answer to whatever their health problems, would be. So people would wouldn't just trust it, but they will trust, you know, whatever other people's GPTs. For example, you know, that's a whether that's a good or bad thing, you know, that's a different story. But I think, just people won't trust, like a very centralized GPT to give them some sort of answers because they're afraid that And, you know, you already saw it with, you know, Google AI and what the kind of, ideologies they might have inserted there. And so, like, you will have a lot of, places where, or GPTs where this, the programming or, like, what is how it's programmed and what it's fed to the information, what it's fed can hugely influence what the outcome is. But if you create your own GPT somehow, with your own, like, data, like, okay, only look at this data or something that I would trust, then that's certainly gonna be more popular. I guess that can also create more polarization because you'll have everyone's my GPD said this, I trust my GPD more than your GPD. So Yeah. It's interesting times for sure. It's a very it's a very interesting point. You you raised that. I mean, I I've I've tested this on multiple people's chat GPTs actually and say Mhmm. Can you tell me what I should do about this next problem? And it comes back with something or other very mainstream. But, okay, can you tell me this now in the biohacker mindset? And it comes back. It's so accurate. Like, so so accurate, I think. But Yeah. You know, like you say, it's only as good as the information put into it. So people say, well, you know, AI would take over the world. The thing is if if in if electricity stopped, it would be no more. Yeah. If we can stop putting more information into the internets, then it will only know up to that point in time. It requires humans to be able to input stuff for it to continue. Otherwise, it goes. So it's it's reliant on us just as the bacteria and viruses are reliant on us as as human keep going. So, you know, if we stop learning in the real world, that data stops going in, and it can't help. So it's a very interesting, you know, the amount of data that's going into it about the output that's gonna come out as we learn as humans. It just has a good way of figuring out and, you know, cross referencing it all. So yeah. Yeah. Gonna be a big I think yeah. I think what what you're doing is that that you're creating your own project there and uploading your own datas and, giving your own feedback to it and teaching it that way. Like, that's, right now, it's, like, a very advanced already, like, because you're just gonna do it much faster, all these connections. So, yeah, it's already, like, quite good for that purpose. I can't wait to say to it, here's my DNA. Tell me which peptides I should be taking. That's it. Yeah. Yeah. Alright. Well, yeah, it was great to talk with you. Yeah. Health Optimization Summit, April 1213 in Austin, Texas. I'll be there. Other other speakers will be there. So, yeah, it's gonna be a good time. Where can people, like, check it out? Hosummit.com/sim,siim. We'll give you all the details, and give you a cheap discount of some description, which I'll ask my team to set up. So, yeah. Looking forward to seeing you there, man. Yeah. Likewise. And, yeah, where can people learn more about you personally? On Instagram at timbiohacker or hosummit.com. Awesome. Put the links in the show notes. And, yeah, it was great to see you. I'll see you in Austin in a in a week. Thanks. Bye. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.