You should take care of your health every day. Here are five things I do every day for my health that you can copy. No. I'm not gonna talk about the obvious such as eating a healthy diet, exercising and getting enough sleep. Instead, I'll cover the less conventional habits that you should be doing. Number one, bright light. The most important part of any day and morning routine is synchronizing your body's circadian rhythms. Circadian rhythms are your body's internal diurnal rhythms that control hormones, metabolism, and different genes related to longevity. For example, you hear a lot of talk about boosting your NAD with supplements. Yes. They do raise NAD, but the more important part is to support your NAD recycling. The key enzyme that maintains NAD recycling is called NAMPT, and that's regulated by SIRT1 which is a circadian rhythm related sirtuin. It does a lot of other things as well but your circadian rhythms control NAD recycling. To keep your body circadian rhythms aligned, you need to get exposed bright lights preferably from sunlight in the morning. The wavelengths of light from the sunrise signal the brain that it's daytime and to start daytime processes and hormonal cycles. This kick start will also help you to sleep at night by helping you to make melatonin in the evening. So what I do is in the summer, I go outside to get natural sun exposure but in the winter, I use bright face lamps and red light therapy devices to compensate for that. The second thing I do every day is sweat in some shape or form. Sweating is a way for your body to eliminate some toxins and heavy metals that we're exposed to on a daily basis. There are studies showing that your sweat contains bisphenol a or BPA which is a chemical in plastics. And it's also seen that BPA is found in the sweat of people whose serum or urine samples had no BPA. Meaning your body can excrete BPA via sweat more effectively than via urine. That's why I like to sweat everyday whether that be in the form of exercise or taking a sauna. My body sweats the most when I'm taking the sauna and a sauna has a lot of other health benefits which is why you wanna do it frequently. In studies on sauna use, those taking the sauna four times per week see a seventy percent lower risk of heart disease mortality compared to those taking the sauna only once per week. Those taking the sauna two to three times per week see a twenty nine percent risk reduction. In other studies, taking the sauna four times per week compared to once results in a sixty six percent lower risk of dementia and sixty five percent lower risk of Alzheimer's disease. Check out my full evidence based protocol for sauna where I cover temperature, duration, frequency and timing. On the days that I don't use the sauna, I usually exercise. Exercise is obviously good for you for many reasons but it also helps you to eliminate heavy metals. In this 2022 study, they saw that dynamic exercise for twenty minutes resulted in more excretion of heavy metals than just sitting in a sauna. That might be because of stimulating the lymphatic system which moves the lymph around your body and without movement, the lymph doesn't move. Combining exercise with sauna has been seen to provide greater fitness and greater cardiovascular benefits than exercise alone, so you want to do both. But doing cardio is a very effective way to sweat and excrete toxins. Number three, decompress the spine. For preventing back pain and just decompressing the spine, I like to hang from a bar every day for at least a minute. Sometimes I do pull ups and at other times I just hang from there. Gravity is constantly pulling you down and compressing your spine especially if you sit a lot or lift heavy weights. Hanging from a barre is the best way to counteract that and it just feels amazing. Hanging also strengthens your grip, improves your shoulder mobility and I also feel that it helps to improve hip tightness and hip mobility just because of the hanging. Grip strength declines with age and low grip strength is associated with a higher risk of mortality. Now I'm not clearly saying that training your grip by hanging is going to make you live longer but hanging will counteract the entropy of your grip strength. It can maintain your grip strength as you get older. If you don't lift anything heavy and you're not using your hands and grip, your body will just end up making you weaker and with low grip strength. If you don't have a bar or a tree branch to hang from, then there are also other ways you can decompress your spine. Doing the sun salutation or the Hindu push up is a great way to open up your shoulders and decompress the spine to a certain extent. There are also many other yoga poses and exercises that you can do such as the cat cow pose, the cobra pose and the camel pose. But in my opinion, hanging is the best. Number four, deep squat. Let's be honest, a lot of us are probably sitting too much and that causes tightness in our hip flexors. Sitting also causes hip pain, knee pain, and lower back pain. All of that can be counteracted with deep butt to grass squats. It's actually the natural sitting position that children and hunter gatherers do every day. They go for number two in this position and they also eat in this position. Doing these deep squats is amazing for your hip mobility, knee pain, lower back pain and just overall functionality. I try to sit in a deep squat for at least a few minutes every day. Whenever you're scrolling your phone, just do it in a deep squat. Or whenever you're drinking coffee, do it in a deep squat. Now chances are, if you're not used to squatting this deep or you lack the proper mobility, then you just need to start squatting as low as you can without pain. You don't wanna cause pain. The goal is to have your heels on the ground and your lower back straight. The best thing about it is that doing these deep squats and working on your squat mobility mobility will improve your back squat at the gym. So you unlock your potential to be stronger with your squats. The last thing I do is walking. I try to get at least 9,000 steps every day. The rationale comes from a study that found that people who walked 8,700 steps per day had a sixty percent lower mortality risk than those who walked only 2,000 steps per day. They also had a fifty one percent lower risk of incident heart disease. The researchers did find an additional five percent reduction at taking 16,000 steps. So if you can walk more, then that's amazing. But you're getting only the minority of benefits by doing that. I already exercise and I'm very physically active pretty much every day, so I don't need to walk deliberately more than 9,000 steps. But on most days, I tend to get around 9,000 up to 12,000 steps per day. The easiest way to reach that amount is having a walking treadmill that I use when working at the computer, but I also have a dog that I walk for at least twenty to thirty minutes every day. These are kind of minor investments I make into my health every day. They're quite small but they keep compounding. If you want to get a full overview of my longevity plan including diet, sleep, and exercise, then check out this video next. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click a like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.