In the eighties researchers from England were developing a drug for angina and hypertension. It was called sildenafil and it was supposed to improve blood flow to the heart by relaxing smooth muscles. Everything was going in the right direction and they did see a decrease in blood pressure. But during the early clinical trials, the male participants started reporting peculiar side effects. They were getting spontaneous and harder erections. The researchers then made a hard pivot going away from angina and hypertension to erectile dysfunction. And as a result, you got one of the world's top best selling drugs ever making billions of dollars of profit and making a lot of older men happier. Hell, the guy who discovered sildenafil, Simon Campbell, was even knighted in 2015. Even more interesting, research today has shown that using sildenafil and other erectile dysfunction drugs is associated with a lower risk of heart disease, alzheimer's and all cause mortality. Are these erection pills longevity drugs? Well, it certainly looks like they have cardio and neuroprotective effects which is what we're gonna talk about in this video. Let's start with how viagra works because it's important to understand why it may have longevity benefits. Sildenafil is a potent phosphodiesterase type five inhibitor or PDE five inhibitor. PDE five breaks down cyclic GMP. The molecule responsible for smooth muscle relaxation in blood vessels. By inhibiting PDE five, sildenafil amplifies nitric oxide signaling leading to sustained vasodilation or the relaxation of blood vessels and improved erectile function. This improved nitric oxide synthesis and vasodilation also has benefits on lowering blood pressure and improving endothelial function which refers to the functioning of your blood vessels. Endothelial function is one of the critical components of atherosclerosis, the plaque accumulation in the arteries. Less arterial stiffening equals better blood flow which in turn equals less plaque build up. That's why exercise is also so good for reducing the risk of heart disease. In a way, sildenafil mimics some of the vasodilating effects of exercise on the blood vessels. There are meta analysis of many studies showing that p d five inhibitor use like viagra or cialis is associated with a lower risk of heart disease, alzheimer's and all cause mortality among older men. The possible explanation is improved blood flow and lower blood pressure. Your erections are a sign of more than sexual function. In fact, they're a direct reflection of your overall cardiovascular function and blood vessel health. There's a strong and consistent association between erectile dysfunction and cardiovascular disease. Patients with erectile dysfunction are fifty percent more likely to develop coronary heart disease. The penis has a lot of micro blood vessels that fill with blood during sexual arousal or stimulation. If the blood vessels are full of plaque or they're too stiff to enable vasodilation then erection will not occur or is significantly weaker. Sildenafil and other p d five inhibitors work in the short term if you take them to improve blood flow to the penis. However, there's also reasons to believe that p d five inhibitors work like a mini workout to the penis by improving blood flow and vasodilation that breaks off the plaque that has accumulated there. And this is also one of the potential explanations why it may have cardiovascular benefits and alzheimer's benefits. It's a mini workout. A 2023 meta analysis of 17 randomized controlled trials saw that sildenafil treatment improved cardiac function, pulmonary pressure, and exercise capacity in men aged 40 to 60. PDA five inhibitor use did show a trend towards reduced mortality in patients with pulmonary hypertension but it wasn't statistically significant because of the small sample size. Now we definitely would need more clinical trials looking at the effects of pdf five inhibitors on things like heart disease, Alzheimer's and mortality. And we would definitely wanna look at the effects on people who don't have comorbidities. They're not old, they don't have hypertension, they don't have other cardiovascular problems. What are the effects of PDE5 inhibitors on healthy people? We don't necessarily know that. However, even if you're the healthiest 70 year old man, you'll still have weaker erections and you'll still have worse blood flow than someone who is 20 years old with all things being equal. That's just the nature of aging. This is where p d five inhibitors might be like a cardiovascular health drug for older men because they also increase nitric oxide and lower blood pressure. Two things old people tend to struggle with. What's even funnier is that it's common for bodybuilders to take viagra as a pre workout to get a better pump at the gym. It's going to make it easier for a body to get improved circulation by inhibiting p d five. And as a result, you'll get a massive blood flow in the muscles that you're training, such as the biceps or the legs. The greatest feeling you can get in a gym or the most satisfying feeling you can get in a gym is the pump. Besides the heart, we also need to talk about the brain because the brain is a cerebrovascular organ and what's good for the heart is also good for the brain. The same hallmarks of cardiovascular disease contribute to neurodegeneration and dementia such as endothelial dysfunction, high blood pressure, and atherosclerotic plaque accumulation. The difference is that heart disease kills you faster on average in your sixties and seventies whereas neurodegeneration starts around late seventies and early eighties. So is Viagra use associated with lower risk of dementia and Alzheimer's? Yes. A 2025 meta analysis of clinical studies on over 4,800,000 individuals out of whom three hundred and forty eight thousand were receiving p d five inhibitors using p d five inhibitors was associated with a fifty three percent lower risk of Alzheimer's disease incidence. A large 2021 analysis of over seven million people found that sildenafil use was associated with a sixty nine percent reduced risk of Alzheimer's disease. Now, the initial reason you might think is that better blood flow, better blood flow to the heart and better blood flow to the brain. Yes, these are all valid reasons, but there's more than that. It's also the case that p d a five is upregulated in neurodegeneration which leads to lower levels of cyclic gmp. Cyclic gmp is important for neuronal health and by inhibiting pda five you are able to maintain better neuronal health and increase the growth of brain cells. Again, we would need more studies and clinical trials to get more clarity but so far it looks pretty promising. To take pda five inhibitors not only for heart disease but also dementia. One fear people might have is that p d five inhibitors increase the risk of prostate cancer, but this hasn't been seen to be the case. They don't increase the risk or recurrence. But p d five inhibitors might have other side effects such as dizziness, headaches, blurry vision or hypotension if your blood pressure drops too low. Overall, using viagra or other erectile dysfunction drugs is associated with lower heart disease, lower dementia and all cause mortality. This means that they might have more benefits beyond just improving sexual function. The mechanistic explanation also makes sense. Better blood flow, increased nitric oxide, lower blood pressure, better endothelial function. These are all risk factors for heart disease and dementia. Are there other things that could explain this explanation? Are people who take Viagra wealthier, the richer? Maybe. But Viagra is a very cheap drug. Do they have better relationships because they take it to have sex with their partner? Yes. That obviously also is a very important aspect. But if you can't have sex, even if you have a partner, then that can have a reduced effect on your mental health. So even if this is the mechanism, the the better mental well-being then it's still probably worthwhile for the elderly people to take viagra. If they think that it will improve their mental health. Are people who take viagra otherwise healthier the so called healthy use of bias? Well if they were significantly healthier than the general population then they probably wouldn't need to take Viagra. But even a healthy 80 year old would see a noticeable effect from Viagra or other p d five inhibitors. I don't think there is enough evidence for young healthy males to take p d five inhibitors for health or longevity purposes but the evidence does suggest that these drugs might have cardio and neuroprotective effects. If you want to know how I rank a 100 common supplements from worst to best then check out this video next.