Remember when you could eat anything as a kid and not gain weight? My parents used to have a joke that whenever there was a birthday cake, they could just cut the cake in half and give each side to me and my brother because we would have eaten the entire cake anyway. To be honest, even now at the age of 30, I could still eat anything I want and not gain weight because my metabolism is still firing on all cylinders. In fact, my resting metabolic rate is 3,300 calories as measured by a test, which is significantly higher than other people. I literally have the metabolism of a kid. The way you unlock your metabolism is to increase your insulin sensitivity, increase your thyroid hormones, increase your resting metabolic rate, and increase your nonexercise activity thermogenesis. In this video, I'm going to go each of these components one by one so you can improve your metabolism and get effortlessly lean. Timestamps for everything are down below. Let's talk about the metabolism. The average resting metabolic rate for children is 45 to 50 kilocalories per kilogram per day, whereas it's around 20 to 25 for adults. The difference is that a child weighs around twenty to thirty kilograms, whereas an adult weighs three to four times that amount. So while children have faster metabolisms relatively speaking, their total metabolic rate is still lower than adults because they're so much smaller. This number is reflected by your resting metabolic rate, which makes up about 60 to 70% of your total daily energy expenditure. The more body weight and muscle you have, the higher this number is. Children have a lower resting metabolic rate because they're smaller. However, children have a very high level of physical activity. It's called exercise activity thermogenesis or EAT and non exercise activity thermogenesis or NEAT. Deliberate exercise activity thermogenesis makes up only about 10% of your total daily energy expenditure, whereas non exercise activity thermogenesis makes up 20% or even more than that. NEAT refers to the spontaneous movements like fidgeting, tapping, being very animated and agile with their movements. Basically, what children do all the time. They can't sit still for long periods of time and they start to swirl around. NEAT can differ between individuals enormously. It can be up to a 2,000 calorie difference between people. Meaning that some people can burn up to 2,000 calories more while just fidgeting and moving around just like kids do. The biggest reason that childhood obesity rates are much higher nowadays than they were in the past is yes, children eat more junk food that is more calorie dense, but children also spend significantly less time doing NEAT. They're not outside playing and running around. They're spending most of their days indoors looking at screens and sitting down just like adults do. It's been seen that NEAT decreases with age because adults are less likely to just randomly run around. That's because it's harder to move around when you're old due to a decline in muscle strength, fitness, and cardio. But not moving around is the reason those abilities decline in the first place. So do you have to start running around like a kid in your house? Well, yes. You could do that but there are also more easier ways to achieve a higher need. If you walk over 10,000 steps every day, you'll rack up quite a nice amount of need. However, there's research showing that children take over 12,000 steps a day, boys up to 15,000, and girls 12,000, whereas most adults take only around 5,000 steps. This means that kids are stepping machines. They walk twice as much as adults do. Which is one of the reasons they burn so many calories as well. Now of course you can't do a lot of walking if you have a sedentary disc job. Fortunately, there's a way to counteract that. Doing soleus push ups while you're sitting is a great way to keep your metabolism active. But it also burns a small amount of calories through NEAT. There's research showing how doing this soleus push up, which is essentially a seated calf raise, improves insulin sensitivity and blood sugar regulation by 52%. So whenever you're in a office job or sitting, just do the soleus push ups. Secondly, take exercise breaks. Children just randomly start running around if they sit for too long. They kick a ball and take a sprint dozens of times a day. As an adult, you should have short one minute exercise snacks several times throughout the day. Run up the stairs, sprint down the driveway, play with the dog or whatever like that. There is research that exercise snacks improve cardiometabolic health and reduce the risk of heart disease and diabetes. Sprinting is another key activity that children do every day. With age, you see a decline in fast twitch muscle fibers, the ones responsible for fast and explosive movements. Having more fast twitch muscle fibers and restoring them with exercise can counter the age related loss of muscle mass and metabolism. This means that by sprinting, you can maintain a higher amount of fast twitch muscle fibers as you age. This then helps you to maintain more muscle, and it also keeps your metabolism more active. Kids sprint around a lot, but I don't know any adult over the age of 30 who sprints regularly. It's been seen that elderly people who do just endurance training have much fewer fast twitch muscle fibers whereas those who do strength training have significantly more. So you need to sprint and lift heavy weights to maintain your speed and strength. The reason kids can eat anything and not gain weight isn't just about burning more calories. Kids are also very insulin sensitive, which means that their bodies are very good at clearing out blood sugar from the bloodstream. Here are ways to increase your insulin sensitivity and glucose tolerance. Sleep seven to eight hours. Even a single night of sleep deprivation has been seen to decrease insulin sensitivity by twenty five percent in healthy people. Stop drinking alcohol or keep it to only one to two drinks per week. Excess alcohol intake impairs insulin signaling, but small amounts of it might improve insulin sensitivity. Maintain optimal vitamin d levels. Vitamin d deficiency can induce insulin resistance, and fixing vitamin d deficiency with vitamin d supplementation reduces insulin resistance. Normal vitamin d levels are 75 to a 175 per liter. So you wanna keep your vitamin d in this range. Get adequate sun exposure. As a kid, I spent at least three times more time outside than inside. The red and infrared light radiation actually supports insulin sensitivity and glucose tolerance. A 2024 study saw that just fifteen minutes of 670 nanometers of red light was able to reduce a glucose rise by 27.7% after intake. Resistance training is one of the most profound ways of increasing insulin sensitivity. It even enhances glucose uptake into muscles without the need for insulin. Having more muscle also means your resting metabolic rate will be higher, which means you'll burn more calories at rest. Children usually don't do resistance training, but they are physically active all day long, which still makes their muscles very insulin sensitive. Lifting weights is just a fast track of increasing your insulin sensitivity instead of having to do exercise for many hours. You also need to have low amounts of visceral fat because visceral fat promotes insulin resistance. Children have low amounts of visceral fat, and visceral fat increases with age. There's a lot that goes into losing visceral fat, and I'm not going to go into all the details in this video. I have another full video that explains the details. But basically, eating more dietary polyphenols and doing aerobic exercise or high intensity interval training has been seen to reduce liver fat and visceral fat. Let's move on with the thyroid. The thyroid gland regulates your metabolic rate and body temperature. Low thyroid hormones reduce your metabolic rate and energy expenditure making it harder to lose weight. To make thyroid hormones, you need certain minerals such as iodine, selenium, sodium, magnesium, and others. But the biggest determinant of your thyroid hormone and thyroid output is energy availability. Is your body experiencing energy stress or energy abundance? The macronutrient that signals energy availability the most are carbohydrates. Even if you aren't eating enough calories, Carbohydrates increase the production of the active thyroid hormone t three, and they also increase your insulin sensitivity by making you produce insulin. If you never spike insulin, you'll have lower thyroid function and worse insulin sensitivity as shown by studies on people who follow a low carb diet. Low carb ketogenic diets have been consistently seen to lower thyroid function as shown by lower t three levels even in healthy individuals. Kids aren't on a low carb diet. They actually eat a lot of carbohydrates and a lot of sugar. And because they're so physically active and insulin sensitive, their body just metabolizes that sugar without causing any problems. The problem for your metabolic health arises when you combine large amounts of carbs and fats together just like the standard American diet. This is the reason why kids nowadays are more overweight and diabetic than in the past. It's not because of eating more sugar, it's because of eating more ultra processed junk food that's high in both sugar and fats. If you eat carbs with low amounts of fat in the context of a whole foods diet, then your insulin sensitivity actually improves. The magic doesn't come from how many carbohydrates you eat specifically. Every person can figure out how many carbs their body needs and how much carbs they can handle. The magic for your thyroid hormones and insulin sensitivity comes from insulin. Insulin gets a bad reputation and it's called a fat storage hormone, but it does a lot of other things, including supporting the production of thyroid hormones and helping to build muscle mass. So you don't necessarily need to eat hundreds of grams of carbs, but you do need a healthy insulin spike, Preferably after exercise when it's going to support recovery and muscle growth. I don't need carbs before my training, but I do eat a lot of them after training, which makes me super insulin sensitive. Alright. Let me give you an overarching plan to improve your metabolism. Do resistance training to increase your resting metabolic rate and insulin sensitivity. You'll be able to eat more calories and more carbs without gaining weight. Increase your non exercise activity thermogenesis. You probably don't want to start fidgeting in your chair, but you should walk more, take exercise snacks, and do the soleus push up while sitting. Get enough sunlight to maintain optimal vitamin d levels and hormone production. Sunlight after eating also helps to lower your blood sugar. Don't restrict carbohydrates. Eat healthy whole food carbohydrates, but don't combine them with large amounts of fat. Get your fat from only whole foods like avocados, nuts, dairy, fish, etcetera instead of butter, oil, or ultra processed foods. Having a healthy metabolism is not only important for weight loss, but also for general longevity. If you want to know the details of how to exercise, how to eat, and which supplements to take, then check out my full evidence based longevity routine next.