Every antioxidant combination needs to be studied in a human because you sometimes don't know if that combination is gonna be pro oxidant, antioxidant, or neutral, where they showed that when people took vitamin e and vitamin c, the adaptive benefits of exercise were completely eliminated. The only thing that's ever been proven to extend lifespan and probably in our lifetime is ever going to be proven in humans is Doctor. Mark, welcome to the show. Thanks very much. My pleasure. Yeah. I'm excited to have you because, you've talked a lot about, the mitochondria, which, are very interesting, organelles and and they're very relevant in, like, the health and longevity space as well. So, yeah, I'm happy to talk with you about all things mitochondria. So essentially, we can maybe we can start with, you know, from high school. We know the mitochondria are the powerhouse of the cell, but, it's obviously a little bit more complex than that. So maybe you can give us, like, a more, brief overview and introduction, you know, what are the mitochondria? Yeah. The mitochondria are thought to be, an invader, if you will, of ourselves. Probably two billion years ago, as we were evolving, we took on the mitochondria, which was thought to be a essentially a form of purple photosynthetic bacteria. And what it did really is helped us to detoxify oxygen, but also more importantly to extract energy. So throughout two hundred sorry, two billion years of evolution, we've remained, in close association with the mitochondria. So what they do is they provide ourselves essentially with energy. And, because they do that, it's called a symbiotic relationship. So we allow them to stay within ourselves in order to conserve, our energy and to provide more bang for the buck. As you mentioned, most people feel that it's just energy, it's the powerhouse of your cell, but mitochondria do many more things. And perhaps it's maybe more important to know what they do when they're not working that causes more of an issue. Certainly with aging, with the genetic mitochondrial diseases that I see, even with things like, dysglycemia, things like obesity, When mitochondria don't work, it causes, problems for the cell. So when mitochondria aren't working, not only do we not get enough ATP or energy, but we also can activate processes like inflammation, oxidative stress, so these free radicals, which can damage protein, DNA, and lipids, which can then cause damage to the cell. There are various other processes. There's one called apoptosis or apoptosis, depending on how you want to pronounce it, which is a form of preprogrammed cell death. They're linked to shortening of our telomeres. And many people are aware that telomeres are essentially these replicometers at the end of our chromosome. And, as we go through our life and we, continually, make new copies of DNA, these telomeres shorten. And when they get to a certain level, the cell kind of goes into a senescence state. So they are linked to many cellular processes. The other one, of course, that, any older adult within muscles is aware of is we have smaller muscles and we need energy to drive what's called protein synthesis. So when they're not working, they have a litany of effects on ourselves. So keeping them healthy is, an important, construct when we think about healthy aging and a healthy lifespan. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, that's very, I guess, somewhat surprising as well as very interesting, the idea that they're like a different, life form inside of us, essentially, that help us to produce energy. And, you know, without your mitochondria, life as we know it would probably not, like, exist, as as humans, or maybe would have would have developed some different kind of, adaptations. But, would like how big of a role does the mitochondria play in just, let's say, you know, aging and, longevity? Yeah. Yeah. It's a good point. And, we know that, certainly humans cannot live without mitochondria. We have children who have severe mitochondrial disease and, sometimes they're dying in infancy. I'm called up to the neonatal ICU. Kids have what's called lethal infantile mitochondrial disease. And even then they still have some functional mitochondria, but it's not enough to sustain, life as we know it. So they're absolutely essential to life. What we see over time is, even a small diminishment of mitochondrial function can contribute to muscles being thinner, various theories of aging. One of them is, this inflammaging where there's low grade inflammation, which can be linked partially to mitochondrial dysfunction. So there's a litany of, of, deleterious effects that happen when, when these aren't functioning properly. But, it's a very interesting point that, evolutionarily what happened is as a bacteria, it probably takes around 1,300 genes to make a mitochondria. We still have this little piece of mitochondrial DNA, which is really a throwback to the fact that they were, bacteria at one point in time and, 37 or 38 genes, depending on how you look at it, are still encoded for by this little piece of mitochondrial DNA, which we get from our moms and moms pass this onto all of their children. But that really forms the backbone of the mitochondria. And then, the nucleus of our cell makes all of the other components, which then come in and help us to form these, elegant, structures, which exist in every cell in our body except for our red blood cells. And we see them in much higher abundance in important tissues like heart, brain, and muscle, where the high energy demand really dictates that we need lots of mitochondria in order to survive. Whereas other tissues, you know, they're in lower abundance, but still important. We've even published, with aging that we have mitochondrial dysfunction in skin, and that can, as we'll talk about later, improve with exercise training. Yeah. That's interesting. You also mentioned that the mitochondria help us to detoxify, like oxygen and produce energy, but, you know, one of the byproducts of that process is oxidative stress itself. So energy production by the mitochondria creates these reactive oxygen species. So, you know, breathing and being alive is causing oxidative stress and damage. And I guess over the course of decades and, you know, over your entire lifespan, Or at least that was one of the old theories of aging that the free radical theory of aging that that is exposure to oxidative stress throughout your lifetime is what drives aging. It's a bit more complex than that, but, essentially, you know, being alive is killing you. Literally that it's causing this oxidative stress and information just through the energy production itself. Yeah. And it's certainly contextual. We need some degree of oxidative stress for human adaptation. So, there's always a level of ROS or reactive oxygen species that are being produced, but we have two ways to combat this. We have endogenous antioxidants, things like manganese superoxide dismutase, catalase, glutathione system, which help to detoxify it. So it usually keeps things in check for most individuals. We also can take exogenous antioxidants, things like vitamin E, vitamin C, and alpha lipoic acid, CoQ10, etcetera. So that endogenous and exogenous pathway usually damp them down so we don't produce excessive amounts. It's interesting. We did studies years ago where we had older adults do exercise. And back then, twenty five years ago, people said, Oh my goodness, you're going to damage people because we know that aging is oxidative stress. Now you're exercising and causing more oxidative stress. However, it's a simplistic view because what happens is when we exercise, we produce these ROS, the cell senses this threat to cellular homeostasis. So what we do is we up regulate mitochondria to deal with the energy crisis. We up regulate antioxidant enzymes. And, Johnny Prizzi, one of my first graduate students, and I were some of the first to show that older adults after training increase their antioxidant defenses and their level of chronic oxidative stress actually goes down. But certainly, many diseases that I see in the clinic with mitochondrial disease, Ross is particularly important. Friedrich's ataxia, for example, you know, too much iron in your mitochondria, huge increase in ROS, and people are going blind, deaf, ataxic, heart issues. And there, there's so many ROS that bringing them down with antioxidants and exercise training is absolutely essential. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, that's that's what they also found with the theoretical theory of aging that if you completely eliminate all oxidative stress and reactive oxygen species, then that actually shortens the lifespan of, like, these model organisms. So, yeah, you need some amount of, these reactive oxygen species to increase your body's endogenous antioxidant defense systems. Yeah. Exactly. And as you know, a similar vein to that point is when people completely suppress ROS production. For example, there was a study by Risto, published in PNAS where they showed that when people took vitamin E and vitamin C, the adaptive benefits of exercise were completely eliminated in sedentary individuals who are doing exercise training. So there was none of the metabolic benefits because in theory, what happens is the ROS feeding through PGC1 alpha, to upregulate mitochondrial biogenesis was blunted when you provide too many exogenous antioxidants. So to bluntly give everybody antioxidants, it's probably why many of the studies fail. One, they may not be getting to where you think they're going to be, someone's exercising, you have to make sure that you're not blunting the benefits. So it's a very nuanced area, the provision of antioxidants to individuals. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I've mentioned that on my channel before that the ant antioxidants, especially after exercise, seem to, like, blunt that response. And the same with, like, ice baths, which are also, you know, very anti inflammatory, and they have, like, a similar effect by suppressing that inflammation. But I've never, like, went into that deep with it. So, does it mean that you're just not really getting any benefits from the exercise? Obviously, you're still, like, you know, exerting calories and energy. So, what are you what benefits are you specifically missing out on, let's say, if you do take high amounts of antioxidants after exercise? Like, are you not getting any the mitochondrial adaptations, or are you not getting any this long term lower level of inflammation response? Yeah. It's a it it's a challenge, and I think it's, contextual. So if somebody is completely healthy and young, there's no increase in basal ROS, It may not be a good idea in the perfect 20 year old healthy individual who's trying to achieve top sport to be taking, anti oxidizes during a training session. However, you know, I used to race internationally in a number of sports and I trained seven days a week for forty five years. Crazy people like me who push themselves to going blind, you know, shutting down your gut and, you know, pooping out blood, you push yourself so hard. That, I think you're crossing into more pathology. So certainly for real top sport athletes, especially multi day events or pushing yourself to absolute extremes, I think you cross from physiologic adaptation into pathology. It's almost like a starling curve. So in those scenarios, and certainly if we're doing a multi day adventure race or I'm racing a top sport and I've got to do two races back to back and we can orienteering or something, I think antioxidants help you to avoid the excessive ROS production. In basal training, for an athlete, probably of no benefit. But certainly there are certain combinations of antioxidants and, you know, we published some stuff and have some recent data as well, that with overweight, people who are overweight or obese, when they do exercise training, there are some benefits to certain types of antioxidants. But again, every antioxidant combination needs to be studied in a human because you sometimes don't know if that combination is going to be pro oxidant, antioxidant, or neutral. And it's very contextual. So, proper clinical trials are important before we try and extrapolate too much. But I think aging, obesity, and extreme sports are scenarios where antioxidant provision of the appropriate type can be of some benefit. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices, which are the BonCharge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes. They do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin antiaging, hormone optimization, pain management, and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes, especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the Bond Charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most regular Therapeuticers don't have the right wavelengths of light, which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Boncharge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research, and they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code SIIM, s I I m, for a 15% discount. Mhmm. Yeah. So it's like when the person has a very high level of inflammation from, yeah, like ex too much exercise or obesity or or just being, from aging, then it can be, useful because the baseline inflammation level is already very high in that situation. Exactly. Yeah. It's very much like a starling curve, you know. Yeah. You can as you go up the curve, there's adaptation, but then when you cross a certain threshold, you go down. So bringing oxidative stress down on the upslope brings you down in terms of function. If you're over that slope, which could be chronic inflammation from obesity, aging, or transient, super high oxidative stress by overtraining, bringing the levels of ROS down, then your function actually goes up because you're on that downslope on the other side. So that's the way I conceptualize it. And that's where I really see the benefits is under periods of increased stress, be it your physiology by being overweight, obese, dysglycemic, or genetic mitochondrial disease or muscular dystrophy and or as we get older. I mean, I'm almost 65 now and clearly, things do change and I definitely take antioxidants you know, now gonna cross over that threshold. Gotcha. Yeah. I also saw some studies that, elderly people who take antioxidants while exercising, they do see greater, like, benefits from the or, like, bigger performance benefits from the exercise, like higher leg press or higher some grip strength than just exercise alone. So, I guess that could be because of they have the higher baseline inflammation. Yeah. There's no question that, again, everything is so contextual and that's why, you know, you can't broadly give, sort of advice across the age spectrum and across the health spectrum, but it's almost a u shaped curve, right, because the top sport athletes who are really pushing super hard are probably crossing into pathology. And then on the flip side, those that are, elderly, aging, muscular dystrophy, whatever, where there's that chronic basal adaptation, both are going to get this, you know, startling curve adaptive benefit when you bring down, reactive oxygen species. Mhmm. Is there also, like, a dose response there that how big of a dose would would it have to be that it becomes harmful, let's say, exogenous antioxidants, vitamin c, or NAC, something like that? Yeah. It's it's difficult to know. So, the challenge that you have there is that, the dose is one thing. You have to have an effective dose. I see so many supplements that are being sold with homeopathic levels and people put a bunch of antioxidants together, they hand wave and they charge a whole bunch for these things, but the doses are far too low to have an effective benefit in a human. And certainly, the other issue that we found is the combination is very, very critically important. So the vitamin E and vitamin C, if you're overweight and you're training, the RISTO study would suggest that's not a good combination, so I would avoid that. But keep in mind that vitamin C is more cytosolic. It's not going into the mitochondria. So if we want mitochondrial protection, which we do in our patients or with aging, which we think is an important resource of the ROS, things like alpha lipoic acid, which is a cofactor in three of the important mitochondrial enzymes, coenzyme Q10, bridge between complex I and complex II in the mitochondria, plus giving redox couples. So it becomes very, very contextual to what you're giving, the doses that you're giving to make sure that they're effective in human. And that's why certainly our research, we look at stuff in animals and cell culture, but we're really not convinced until we go into the human, and then we can see does this dose work on average in this specific patient group and or group of athletes. Gotcha. Yeah. What about the endogenous antioxidants then? You mentioned that these increase when you are exercising and, they have a positive effect. So, yeah, how how how should we think about these endogenous antioxidants? Yeah. Again, very few studies have actually looked at that. So in terms of providing exogenous antioxidants, it is very likely, and I can't think of a study, we didn't even look at this, where we actually measured the blunting of endogenous antioxidants. I think they probably come to an equipoise, right? So, more of the exogenous, and then you don't uproot it as much as the endogenous. But what one has to do is just make sure that the adaptation that you care about, if it's glycemic control, muscle strength, bone, sprint performance, endurance performance, that those outcomes that we're looking at are actually favorably enhanced by whatever intervention you're doing. And we know for older adults, leg strength is critical to health span and longevity. Even grip strength is VO2 max is very, very strongly correlated to health span. So, you want to make sure that those metrics are measured for an older adult and or if you're an endurance athlete, you know, VO2 max and, you know, anaerobic threshold and all of these other important factors need to be appropriately determined in response to the intervention that you give. Mhmm. Yeah. As I as I understand then, it's better for your health to take if you ever were to try to supplement antioxidants, it's like better to take some of the precursors so your body would make the antioxidants themselves rather than just take the straight up antioxidants. So let's say, gliothon, it's better to take glycine and AC than to just let's say, like, an average situation, maybe there are obviously, there are specific situations where glutathione is a better option, but, like, as a general person who is just, you know, taking certain supplements for health and wellness, then, in that situation, it's better to take the precursors because then your body can also, like, autoregulate how much glutathione it will produce from them. Yeah. It's a, you know, it's a difficult concept. I mean, in theory, that that that may work. But, you know, again, that just emphasizes so important when you start talking about antioxidants to measure it in a human. So many people provide antioxidants to a human and they assume that they're functioning as antioxidants in that human. And it's critical that in the context that you're looking at, that you actually measure, is it truly functioning? We did a study, for example, which has got me onto this years ago. We were following up on, some of the work that, Julie Sampierre was doing when she was working with Bruce Spiegelman, and she was looking at the link between ROS and PGC1 alpha expression. So we tried to do a study with muscle biopsies looking at mRNA abundance three hours after an acute load of exercise. So in vitro, we came up with this mixture of antioxidants. We just picked everything off the shelf, glutathione and vitamin C, vitamin E, selenium, blah, blah, blah. Threw it all together and it was an incredible antioxidant in vitro. We couldn't even generate free radicals. They were just eaten up so much in the ORAC assay. So the ORAC assay was just the most potent antioxidant you could possibly imagine. We gave it to the folks and when we finished the study, it went in the opposite direction. So I thought my student must have mixed up the columns or something. And as it turns out, these antioxidants, when we gave them to humans in the human body after you go through absorption, digestion, all the metabolic process of going on, became a pro oxidant. So when we actually looked at markers of oxidative stress, they're actually higher with the antioxidants. So again, there's so much misinformation about antioxidants that's out there where people are assuming that some mixture, which sounds really good and even in vitro, it looks great, but you give it to a human, you've got to measure. Our cocktail that we came up with for our mitochondrial patients, in 2007, we did a randomized double blind crossover study, with a combination of alpha lipoic acid, coenzyme Q10, vitamin E and creatine. We showed with two markers of oxidative stress in humans with genetic mitochondrial disease, we could lower lactate and lower the two markers of oxidative stress. Whereas everyone said, you know, Mark, we don't know what's working, typical drug approach. We want one compound, that's it, which is sort of the illogical, we're treating complex disease. But anyhow, I went ahead, did a clinical trial with huge doses of coenzyme Q10, which many people are familiar with as a fairly popular antioxidant, six hundred milligrams twice daily of hydro soluble CoQ10. And we showed absolutely no reduction in oxidative stress whatsoever. So again, we have to be very careful about what studies we're looking at to, to really know is it truly functioning in the way that you expect that it's it's it's doing so. So in your in your research, the combination of those ingredients was superior to just the CoQ10 alone, which, yeah. Yeah. CoQ10 is thought to be like a mitochondrial supporting agent, but, yeah, I guess, in your case, yeah, you needed to combine it with certain ingredients to get the best effect. Absolutely. And part of that is number one, if you put two agents together, make sure they're going to end up in the same spot because when free radicals are produced, you know, they last for femtoseconds and they don't cross membranes. So, free radicals produced in the mitochondria are not going to be buffered by an antioxidant like uric acid that sits in the cytosol or vitamin C. So, our logic behind that, what we call the mitochondrial core, which, you know, is now standard of care for our patients, and forms the basis of a number of different, concoctions we've come up with for obesity and aging and other things. So what we found is that we want the vitamin E to protect membranes. We wanted the creatine because of the creatine phosphocreatine shuttle in out of the mitochondria and studies have shown that it has some antioxidant potential. But then we also wanted the alpha lipoic acid and the CoQ10 as a redox couple, knowing that both coexist in the mitochondria. So they're close to the proximate source of the reactive oxygen species. And again, until you study it in a human, you don't know. And these patients are severe. So put it into context, as we sit here, our VO2 is around about 3.5 to four milliliters per kilogram, per minute. These patients at VO2 max, seven to eight mls per kilogram per minute. So, you know, even a sedentary person is going to be, you know, 20 to 30, for most people. So these patients are profoundly impaired and still we were able to lower the ROS and to lower their lactate values. Yeah. So what about exercise? I think most people in the know do think that exercise is one of the best ways to support mitochondrial health. So, what is happening with exercise that why is it so good for the mitochondria? Yeah. Exercise really is the the gold standard. I I mean, all of this hand waving just makes me sick to think about people saying that their lifespan extension videos and there's even Netflix films on people trying to extend their lifespan. The only thing that's ever going to extend lifespan and probably in our lifetime is ever going to be proven in humans is endurance exercise. So, it's very clear that there's meta analysis and there's been data for the last twenty to thirty years that has come out clearly showing that regular endurance exercise gives us about four year lifespan extension. More importantly, it gives us a ten year health span extension. And why does it do so? It does so because exercise is a dirty drug. That's the way I think about it. So exercise increases mitochondria, it increases your antioxidant defense systems, it increases heat shock proteins. And that's probably why things like episodic saunas are probably beneficial. Any stressor to the body is physiology. Our body is going to adapt and it's going to respond better the next time it's exposed to stress. So heat shock proteins, lower basal inflammation. So pretty much any hallmark of aging you can think about, exercise has a favorable effect on it. So all of these people who embrace drugs and think they're going to come up with an exercise drug with a single compound, it's going to fail because exercise is just such a beautiful evolutionary process that has allowed humans likely to evolve as Homo sapiens for the last three hundred thousand years because of the multiplicity of benefits that it confers on the human body. And when we think about this garbage where people think that metformin or rapamycin is going to extend their lifespan, you know, there's so many off target effects and deleterious effects, which, you know, other than extreme exercise, maybe getting atrial fib, which I've had, There's really no downside to to proper exercise. Yeah. Definitely, I agree with that. With endurance exercise, it's something also very unique to humans. So humans are probably one of the best ultra endurance species on the planet. So, like, we we're not very fast in a sprint compared to, like, a cheetah. We're also not very fast compared to, like, a gazelle over the course of few kilometers, but there's no other animal that can literally run, like, a 100 kilometers and not, bunk. So, yeah, humans are pretty much like the old trendurance species, and, you know, for and it's also, like, what was evolutionarily selected for because that's how that is one of the forms of hunting we did in the past was called, like, this persistence hunting where you just, yeah, chase down a gazelle or tens of kilometers, it just gets tired over time. Obviously, we're not gonna catch it with a sprint, but over the course of many kilometers, that's how we, catch it because then it just gets too tired and it's not able to run anymore. So, yeah, it's kind of evolutionarily selected for as well that the humans that have survived up until this point, they were very good at ultra endurance sports. Yeah. And it's, it's interesting too because if you think about the out of Africa hypothesis, you know, looking at mitochondrial DNA haplogroups, you know, we assume somewhere between 250,300 years ago, the L0, which is the original mitochondrial haplogroup for Homo sapiens, came out likely somewhere in North South Africa and then came up through the Fertile Crescent about 80,000 years ago. And if you look at East Africa, it appears that endurance capacity was selected for. And that's where most, you know, Caucasians eventually came out through the Fertile Crescent there. And if we look now at, you know, the athletes in Kenya, Ethiopia, very, very skinny, very endurance rich. But if you look at the high plains there, that's where I think this endurance conferred advantage. But getting back, and I only just thought about this now that we're talking about it, if you look at West Africa, you look at the enrichment of muscle mass. So if you look at people winning the 100 meters, pretty much the top 100 or so with rare exception can ultimately trace their roots to West Africa. And the topography of the geography was different. So it's likely that there was some biological advantage conferred by big, large mussels in that slightly different topography versus the higher plains on East Africa. And when we think about the ultimate for aging after all of my research comes together, and even being previously the international level endurance athlete, I was getting skinny, picking up my grandchildren, getting back pain. We need both as we get older. So we need both the endurance adaptation and we also need the strength adaptation. And, it's harder to measure the benefits of strength, because there's no study. Very few people did strength training their whole lives. We don't have the epidemiology to say, oh, if you do this your whole life, you're going to get lifespan or health span extension. However, we and others have clearly shown up to age 92 in our studies, you take an older adult, you give them an exercise training program, increase muscle mass, they can get up the stairs better, they can get off the floor better, they can get out of a chair and walk 10 meters better. All of those important metrics of health span are improved. So there's no question that optimal aging, we really need both to think about endurance, but also to be thinking about strength. And I certainly now try to titrate as best I can, 40% of my training, more power and strength as opposed to before is a 100% endurance. Yeah. Yeah. What is happening on, like, the mitochondrial level with exercise? Maybe, obviously, there's a bit different adaptations from, let's say, power and endurance. So but, with endurance, obviously, there's maybe, like, the cardiovascular component that explains the longevity benefits, with, like, reduced heart disease. But what is, like, on the mitochondria level happening? Like, are you building new mitochondria, or are you removing old mitochondria, or what's happening? Yeah. You know, it's interesting because people call it mitochondrial biogenesis, but we're likely, you know, and then they think about these little mitochondria as these perfect paramecium like things in a cell and then, oh, look, they double and they triple and we get more and more. But if you look at skeletal muscle, for example, a lot of that is a reflection of how we look at mitochondria. If you cut a muscle and you look at them, they look like a bunch of blobs. But if you do three d reconstruction with various electron microscopes, you can see that it's an incredibly, intricate reticulum. And so what we have is not just little blobs floating around, but this, this incredible, almost like, you know, fungus underground, interactive borg species where they're all together. And so what happens, throughout our life is we do encounter a number of stressors, whether you've over exercised, maybe some toxins, whatever, certain regions of that mitochondrial reticulum. For example, here, I might get some ionizing radiation, cause some damage to the mitochondrial DNA energy charge, or Delta cyan goes down. Eventually, it gets identified. So what happens is we then cleave off that piece through something called mitophagy and the ability to remove damaged mitochondrial pieces and then to fuse together with mitofusens, the reticulum to reestablish those connections and keep that reticulum healthy. That's very important. So what happens, we've done muscle biopsy studies after three months of endurance training. The reticulum of the mitochondria in skeletal muscle can go from about two percent of the volume of the muscle to 4%. So we can double the reticulum. So what happens is we actually get hypertrophy of the mitochondria. But again, it's an improvement of the reticulum. But we're also, I call it the pruning of the tree hypothesis. So if we can't remove the sort of stochastic accumulation of damage that happens throughout our lifespan, we eventually start to get damage. It's very much like a tree that wasn't pruned. And you probably look at a tree that wasn't pruned, you know, you've got the few leaves that are all dying. But you prune your tree in the springtime and you get this beautifully growing tree. And I really think at a very simplistic level, that's really the way as we age, that's what happens to our mitochondria. If we sit on our butt, eat crap, you know, and with your skin, you're exposed to ionizing radiation, don't use sunscreen. You're just going to keep damaging those mitochondria. And as we get older, if we can't undergo autophagy slash mitophagy and clean them up, then we don't prune the tree and we have dysfunctional mitochondria. And part of the benefits of exercise and with older adults, Johnny Parisi and I have shown that even with resistance training, doing standard weights, we actually do improve and prune up the tree. So, younger people tend to get more hypertrophy and that's all we see. We don't see much mitochondrial biogenesis when they lift weights, but older adults, we get mitochondrial biogenesis and strength improvements. So I think there's a bit of more of yeah, I should say, lack lack of specificity, let's say, as people get older, so there's more bang for your buck. Yeah. That that makes sense. So for younger individuals, it's more beneficial to do, obviously, still like a mix of training, but, you get more benefits for the mitochondria from endurance exercise when you're younger. And when you're older, you you get any form of exercise will give benefits? Absolutely. You know, I think and we've done studies too where we took older adults. We did three months of endurance, and then we flipped them to three months of resistance. And as you would expect during, endurance, we get increases in VO two and decreases body fat, but no increases in strength. Then you do weight training, you see increases in strength, but no change in VO2. Muscle mass goes up, but body fat doesn't go down. So I think ultimately it's that mixture. But again, top sport athletes, you really don't want to be doing any weight training. If you're a long ultra runner, you don't want some extra muscle mass. So for top performance, it's a little bit different. I think the problem is a lot of exercise physiology was really focusing on the extremes. But you know, when we start thinking about healthy aging, I think we need to blend things together a little bit more. Yeah. What about the high intensity interval training? Is that something different or does it provide which, like, which category would it fall into? Yeah. It kind of falls through the cracks a little bit, you know, and Marty Gabala, whom I'm sure you're aware of, a good friend and colleague, we did a lot of the muscle biopsies and the mitochondrial work in our lab. And what we showed is it was very similar to what we call mixed, moderate intensity continuous training, which is what most research has done with endurance. And the adaptations, you can split hairs here and there and one study can show one or the other, but really, they're very similar in terms of the mitochondrial adaptations that you get. You know, the only issue is, I think at the end of the day, the type of exercise that works best for you is the one you're gonna do. I hated intervals as of when I used to race at a high level. I loved long, slow distance stuff, and other buddies of mine hated the long distance. They loved doing intervals. So, you know, I think whatever floats your boat, and the only downside I think of the high intensity, is certainly for older adults, if they have a knee issue or a back issue or something, likely a greater propensity for some musculoskeletal issues. But if you enjoy it, you know, then it might be the right thing for you. But you're going to get very similar benefits from properly done high intensity interval training as you are with the with the, moderate intensity continuous. Mhmm. Yeah. One thing you already alluded a little bit earlier was muscle loss with age, so which is called sarcopenia. And, you know, apparently, there's, like, some role for the mitochondria in that that dysfunctional mitochondria lead to sarcopenia or they have like a contributing effect to sarcopenia. So, can you elaborate a little bit more about that? So, essentially, what was shown, I think the best research was a fellow named Jed Akin, who ran a lab looking at this concept and was the first really to show that with aging, if you do cross section, what you'll see is the muscle fibers that start to get mitochondrial dysfunction, the so called cytochrome c oxidase negative fibers. We call them COX negative fibers. Those negative fibers were smaller. So what they did is they used laser capture microdissection to cut out the COX negative fibers. And in those fibers, they found, you know, mitochondrial DNA deletions, and they were associated with the, reduction in mass. You know, some people thought, well, you know, if you do a muscle biopsy and you homogenize it, depending on the age of the person, sometimes you don't see much mitochondrial dysfunction. So some people question the relationship. But if you think about it, aging happens very slowly. You're not losing more than one or one and a half percent of your muscle mass per year as you get older, even that would be a little bit accelerated. So that's a very difficult thing to measure. But what Jed showed, which is the way I think about it, muscle fibers are very, very long. And, you know, if I have one area here that starts to get mitochondrial dysfunction, just like my reticulum, in that area, those mitochondria aren't providing the energy for muscle protein synthesis, and then that fiber will shrink a little bit. But then the rest of the fiber is pretty good. So you're getting almost like this starry sky pattern where these processes are occurring in the muscle randomly throughout. So unless you do, you know, many hundreds of sections, which is what he did, you know, you kind of miss these areas. And remember, once a fiber is gone, it's gone. You can't count it. So, I think that's part of the, you know, methodological reasons why some people were sort of discounting it. But I think Jed's data is pretty congruent. We also see it in our patients, for example, with chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia or Mila syndrome. In the ragged red fibers and the Cox negative fibers, they are smaller, which is intuitively totally makes sense. If you don't have the energy for muscle protein synthesis, degradation will then exceed synthesis and that region of the fiber is going to shrink. So I think it's pretty clear that mitochondrial dysfunction is a contributor. We also know that, we lose about 30% of our alpha motor neurons from age 30 to about age 65. There's a little bit of sprouting that goes on, but there is some work that mitochondria in the alpha motor neuron also likely is contributing. So I think there's this yin and yang between the alpha motor neuron and the muscle. But collectively, anything we can do to maintain alpha motor neurons like exercise, maintain, mitochondrial function, prune that tree, keep the good mitochondria present, you know, we can attenuate this. And Justin Crane, one of my PhD students, and I have clearly shown that, you know, top sport masters athletes maintain better strength and function, versus sedentary individuals when they're in their sixties and stuff. Mhmm. Yeah. With a much higher VO2 max too. Yeah. So every cell has their own mitochondria. Right? And, so therefore, every neuron also has their own mitochondria. Very much so. Yep. Yeah. So that so is then is, like, the decline in the mitochondria inside those neurons and in those muscle cells is kind of the first domino, that, you know, leads to the domino effect or how does it go in your opinion? Well, no one really knows, you know, which comes first, but the two can work in both ways. So you can imagine that if in my muscle, there's a region where I have dysfunctional mitochondria and it's not properly pruned out, and then I get an atrophic fiber, the neuromuscular junction can pull away from that fiber and then that can have a retrograde effect on the alpha motor neuron. Conversely, if you think about an alpha motor neuron, you know, you've got this this big cell body that's in the, anterior part of your spinal cord, And then all the proteins have to go down with these dynamin motors all the way down, you know, sometimes a meter and a half. So, if you have dysfunction here and then we're not keeping those neurons intact and or as we start to lose some of the muscle fibers, we can't get collateral sprouting, which requires protein synthesis. Then muscle affects nerve, nerve affects muscle. So I think the two are integrally related and researchers who start debating it's only one or it's only the other, I think are missing out on the complexities of the human body that it's never just one or the other. It's usually an interaction between two. But clearly, we haven't published this yet, but we've shown that lifelong exercise in mice definitely maintains the alpha motor neuron pool, and a few others have shown that as well. Mhmm. Gotcha. What about nutrition? So we mentioned a few of these supplements, ingredients that have benefits on the mitochondria, like CoQ10, etcetera. Is there any like specific, I guess, nutritionally equivalent to exercise or something that is very important to maintain the mitochondrial health? Well, we do know, and work that Sue Phillips and I did after endurance exercise, that there is an activation of protein synthesis, during endurance exercise. And as we've known for years after resistance exercise, resistance tends to be more fibrillar component. So they contract all proteins, synthesis goes up. But, Stu and I, you know, doing biopsies and measuring the operation of the mitochondrial function showed that there is protein synthesis going following endurance exercise. So what my my very first paper in 1988, if you can believe it, was, one of the first to show that top sport endurance athletes required weightlifting, almost twice, the Canadian and US, DA at the time. And at the time, people said, well, it doesn't make any sense. You know, you're skinny little ones. Why do you need this extra protein? I think part of it is likely that, you know, you do have this turnover in mitochondria. There are other enzymes that are upregulated, you know, mitochondrial creatine kinase, glycogen synthesis goes up. There's just so many enzymes that are upregulated that there is an increased need for protein. We did a study, which I'm hoping to publish in the new year at one of my previous postdocs, where we took top triathletes and tried to put them on the Canadian DRI, many people were dropping out after a week. They could not maintain their training on the 0.8 grams of protein per kilogram body mass, whereas our estimate for top athletes is 1.6 to 1.7. On that, of course, the that's what they were habitually taking in. But we tried to drop them down to what our government said was fine, and they were tanking. We didn't actually measure the, you know, various components of the protein, but I think it's pretty clear from subsequent work, you know, you're failing to make new mitochondria. You're failing to keep all of the enzyme adaptations that we get with endurance exercise if we don't feed enough protein. So we think of protein always to maintain muscle mass. That's been well shown with older adults, you know, probably 1.2 grams of protein per kilogram per day. Again, contextual, you know, no two proteins are the same. Collagen protein, which is low biological value versus milk based protein. The milk obviously can get by with a slightly lower amount. So if you are a poor quality protein, obviously, you're and that's important to support the endurance patient, but also the resistance or muscle mass component. Mhmm. Yeah. That makes sense. So 1.6 grams per kilogram is for, like, athletes? Yeah. 1.6, 1.7. You know, we came up with that. I think it was 1.67 with nitrogen balance, but subsequently, people have used very stabilized scope tracers to show very similar numbers from top sport athletes. Vymsaras, you know, did some work on the the guys that were doing the Tour de France and came up with a very similar number. So back then, I was laughed at. People said it's crazy. There's no way that these athletes need one nineteen. But I think, multiple lines of evidence, you know, Vim the Tour de France folks, other folks with stable isotopes. It's it's pretty clear that, you know, 1.7 is the maximum that top sport endurance athlete needs. And most people are getting that in. The reason why it's important is that strict and there are people that go on crazy diets and they have low quality protein, high collagen protein, for example, or low energy if they're trying to lose weight. Those are the folks who are losing protein and subsequently compromising their performance. We did a study with young women athletes in their 20s, and just changing the timing of protein put them into a more positive nitrogen balance. So we gave them 20 grams of protein with breakfast or 20 grams right after workout. And when we gave it to them right after workout, they were in a more positive nitrogen balance and performed better at the end of a week of a simulated training camp. Yeah. So the first study that we did, in patients with genetic mitochondrial disease was to target some of the final common pathways of mitochondrial dysfunction. So what we did was included two antioxidants, which we know are in the mitochondria, coenzyme Q10 and alpha lipoic acid. They're also important cofactors in the electron transport chain and three other metabolic pathways, respectively with alpha lipoic acid. We also put in vitamin E to provide some membrane protection as a chain breaking antioxidant, knowing also that we have complex membranes including the inner node or mitochondrial membrane. And then on top of that, knowing that creatine can help to buffer, at least in the rest exercise transition, that drop in ATP, we knew that ATP levels were low in the brain of our mitochondrial patients. They drop quickly and recover slowly after exercise in our patients. So we included creatine for that reason, but also creatine is an important signaling molecule. The creatine phosphocreatine shuttle, that Theo Walliman first proposed is important to sort of kick start the mitochondria. So we had those four together. We did a randomized double blind crossover study with a washout, and what we showed is the markers of mitochondrial dysfunction in our patients: lactate, which is an indicator of impaired mitochondrial function, and two markers of oxidative stress, eight hydroxy-two deoxywanosine and eight isoprostanes were lower when they were on the active versus the placebo. So that was our first study. We were criticized because everybody is very pharmacentric and that's been the way everyone's thought about treatment for the last fifty years and still continued to be the issue. And so everyone wants to identify one compound that's patentable and identify the target, engage the target, look at the pKs and go through, clinical trials. So we were criticizing, you know, you used a final common pathway approach with multi ingredients. We think it's just CoQ10. So we did a study with very high doses of coenzyme Q10, the dew water soluble form, six hundred mg twice daily and showed absolutely nothing. No lowering of lactate, no lowering of oxidative stress markers. And I think part of that is any antioxidant can become a pro oxidant. Many antioxidants need redox couples, and in addition, we really need to have antioxidants present where the free radicals are being produced given this specific situation. Free radicals are produced locally in response to different biochemical pathways and they have very short distances over which they affect. So if you've got an antioxidant to cytosol and the ROS are generated, the mitochondria, you know, you miss the boat, you're not going to be able to buffer it. So that's where we started and we've gone on, you know, in full disclosure, we actually started a company based on this to treat obesity, where we took that mitochondrial, base or core, whatever you want to call it, and then we added to it depending on the circumstance. So for obesity, we looked at a whole host of supplements which were helpful, green tea extract, green coffee bean extract, black tea extract, Forscholine, and CLA, which probably have the best support in humans and animal models. And we found that those were very effective, but they were synergized with the mitochondrial cocktail addition. Interestingly, the mitochondria cocktail that we just described, even with beet root extract to increase nitrates, was okay from an obesity perspective, but it was really synergized when we put all 10 together. But even more so when we pulled out three, we had this unexpected synergistic effect to increase mitochondria in the fat cells. And we've also shown protection in the muscle as well from hypoxia with that combination. We've published papers and filed patents on some of these for improvement in mitochondria in the skin using, again, that core, but we use other things like Bioten. So I think, you know, when someone says, you know, what antioxidants work first, they've got to be proven in humans to do what you think they're going to do. Safety is important, tolerance is important. And, you know, in in our company, and my thought process is to start with the core that was proven to work. And then depending on the indication, you know, you can add or subtract certain things, always keeping, the core, from what we've shown is beneficial. What I can say is we have done, experiments where we, took, you know, 15 antioxidants, at least labeled as antioxidants, put them into a mixture, and turned out that they became pro oxidants in the human. So a lot of the brands that are out there, a lot of the research is hand waving, even with some of the drugs that are supposed to lower oxidative stress. And it's actually never been proven in the physiology and pathology of a human to do what people think it's going to do. But because it's labeled an antioxidant, they think it's functioning as such. So that's a big caution, I would say, for most people. Mhmm. Yeah. Gotcha. So CoQ10 alone isn't is, you know, one of the more commonly known mitochondrial supplements. So CoQ10 alone necessarily isn't enough? I don't believe so, and and that's based on strong experimental, evidence. So those were large numbers. The second study, thirty people, proven genetic disease. We did spectroscopy, cyclergometry, and didn't show what we showed with the combination. You know, my firm belief, which was a hypothesis I put forward in 2001, is that to effectively target aging and complex, biochemical, disturbances in pathologies, We can't just rely on a single drug or a single agent. And I think, at the end of the day, when I was younger and studying exercise a lot, people said, well, you're not really a neurologist. You're not really a proper scientist because exercise is dirty. But that's the beauty of exercise is it is a dirty drug. And that's why it's the only thing that's been shown to extend the lifespan in a human and increase health span because it has this multiplicity of benefits. And therefore, I don't think a single drug or a single nutrient is going to have anywhere close to the benefits that exercise and properly targeted and clinically studied multi ingredient supplements are going to come close to. And then finally, it's very important and we've shown clearly with our combinations that they have to work with exercise because there is a concern that certain antioxidants can blunt the benefits of exercise. For example, vitamin E and vitamin C together and a good study in PNAS was shown to blunt the adaptive benefits of exercise. So we study our stuff in mice, preclinical work and more importantly in humans to prove that we're not blunting the important benefits we get from exercise. Yeah, yeah, that's a very important point. What about other in like specific mitophagy supplements? So it's the process of clearing out old mitochondria. Do you think there's any evidence in that area? Yeah, You know, there's no question that the best way to clean up your mitochondria is, you know, the hypothesis put forward about fifteen, twenty years ago is that I think the benefits of exercise in older adults when they start exercising is to put the mitochondria through an acute physiologic stress, induce my topology, clean up the bad mitochondria that have accumulated throughout your life, and you're left with a better mitochondria. And it's the physiologic stress that cleans the mitophagy that I think really gets you better mitochondria, more so through the accumulator damage to your body. So then everyone is going to go excited to try to activate autophagy. I will say that doing stuff in a petri dish only, and even in animals, you can be misled. We can take almost any compound. We can take rotenone, which is a toxin for complex one. We can take sugar. We can take almost anything, put it in a Petri dish and induce autophagy. No big deal. You know, anyone can do that. And all you have to do is change the timing, the duration, and the concentration of certain, supplements, drugs, even nutrients, and you can induce autophagy. So I am completely underwhelmed with any group that says that they have an autophagy inducer, a mitophagy inducer within vitro work. Animal work is difficult to extrapolate as well. We've had many discrepancies between animals and humans. So ultimately, it comes down to do these do something in humans. And again, it's contextual. Is it working on top of exercise? I've not seen a study that's ever shown in a human with any of these so called mitophagy inducers that they conferred any benefit over and above what you're already getting from exercise. Number two, I don't want to get too much into it, but the most famous one, of course, which everyone's familiar with MitoPure, the name that they came up with was that you're purifying the mitochondria with urolithin A. When you look at the human data, the five hundred milligram versus the thousand milligram dose in middle aged humans, there's a complete discrepancy between the supposed mechanism of action and what it's supposed to do. So when phosphoparkin went up, there was no increase in mitochondria. Mitochondria went up phosphoparkin and it didn't go up. So they're trying to say and, you know, the title of new papers coming out is the, you know, mitophagy inducer urolithin. So the title of the paper is, misleading and telling you what it's supposed to do. But, you know, when you start looking at it, I think that the the data is is not as strong as the advertising the name of the the drug is meant to be. Now I think it may well be a component of a multi ingredient supplement that could confer benefits. But again, do it in humans, do it in a proper GCP, a good clinical practice, clinical trial, in humans and in the target group that you're looking at. And for me, every disease I see aging, I'm a big proponent of the benefits of exercise. So, you have to be either not inhibiting the benefits of exercise and then conferring something over and above exercise, maybe in a different way. So you VO2, if it still goes up by the same amount, but you're losing more body fat, for example, that's a benefit. But you cannot attenuate the benefits of exercise with the supplement. So that's why we're big proponents of testing with exercise. Mhmm. Yeah. Well, I thank you so much for your time and knowledge. Before I ask, I'll ask a question, where can people learn more about you and your work? Thanks so much. It's been my pleasure and enjoy. Where can people learn more about you and your work? Well, you know, obviously, you know, from a full disclosure perspective, of course, we started the company based on all this work and, you know, that company is Exercine. Stay Above Nutrition is the sort of the nutritional component to it. You know, People just need to PubMed to see that we've actually done work. I think as you're probably aware, there's a lot of people who are talking the talk but not walking the walk. There's very famous people, Peter T. And others, never published a paper in his life in nutrition or aging and yet everyone the one thing I think that we do and some of my colleagues like Stu Phillips is we're actually doing the research. And it's very difficult because you're laying yourself out there for criticism. All of our raw data is available, even the stuff from our company. We don't hold anything back. All of our raw data is held by five independent people outside of the company. So upon reasonable request, people can take our data and make sure that it's data locked and well, yeah. It was great to talk with you. And, my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you adopted sooner? I think more weight training or resistance training. Unfortunately, I was an elite endurance athlete and I raced really hard to the point of taking three cardiac ablation surgeries and did well, but you're skinny and you hurt your back picking up your children. And clearly with aging, everything we've done shows that mixing endurance and resistance is the healthiest aging. The other thing so two things. One is I wish I did more resistance. Number two, I wish that I knew what I knew now about certain supplements. And the fact that when you're working at really high levels of elite endurance sport, these crazy races, three days, there is some damage that occurs. And I wish that I had better attention to my protein and I wish I was taking some of the antioxidants that I now take, with healthy aging, having had three cardiac ablation surgeries, over exertion for too many years. Mhmm. Yeah. Definitely, yeah, like a balance between both types of exercise. Absolutely. Balance and exercise and proper supplementation. Yeah. Well, yeah, this has been great, and definitely looking forward to your future studies and work. Thanks very much. There was a lot coming out. Stay tuned. Yeah. Thank you.