A higher cardiac respirator fitness is one of the biggest predictors of longevity and reduced mortality. In this video, I'm going to talk about how I increased my VO2 max from 53 milliliters per kilogram per minute to 66 milliliters per kilogram per minute. That puts me into the elite category of all age groups. What does VO two max mean? VO two max refers to the maximal amount of oxygen consumption during physical activity. During exercise, your muscles require oxygen to produce energy. VO two max reflects the body's ability to transport oxygen from the air to the lungs through the bloodstream and ultimately to the muscles where it's utilized for energy production. A higher VO two max generally indicates higher card respiratory fitness and endurance. A 2022 study saw the lowest mortality risk at a VO two max of fifty milliliters per kilogram per minute with no increase in risk with extremely high cardiorespiratory fitness. The least fit individuals had a four time higher risk of mortality compared to the extremely fit ones. For reference, Olympic athletes and professional endurance runners have a VO2 max above eighty milliliters per kilogram per minute. So a VO2 max of 50 is very much achievable for the majority of people. I first measured my v o two max in August 2023, and I got a result of fifty three milliliters per kilogram per minute. That already puts me into the lowest risk category, above 50. For my age group at a time, it was already in a good category, but it wasn't in the elite group. In this study, they outlined the v o two max standards of different age groups. The graph is in METs or metabolic equivalents. One MET is equal to 3.5 kilogram per minute of v o two max. So my result of 53 is 15.1 METs, which is in the high category of my age at the time. It's not bad, but I wanted to take it to the excellent level. So I started to train my v o two max specifically, which I wasn't doing that much before. I measured my v o two max again in November and got a result of 66 per kilogram per minute, which is a 13 increase. That's the equivalent of 18.8 METs. That puts me into the elite category of 18 year olds, which is the age when VO two max is the highest. Now that's more like it. I increased my VO two max in a relatively short amount of time, and I think my health and longevity improved tremendously by doing that. So how did I do it? The simple answer is I did more cardio. When I first did a test, I hadn't trained my v two max that much, and my body was very sensitive to the new training stimulus. Every time you start a new kind of exercise, you'll see rapid progress because it's a new stimulus. If you remember going to the gym for the first time, you saw very fast results within weeks. Every time I went to the gym thirteen years ago, I got stronger with every workout. Whereas now I have to train for months to see small improvements. The same applies to vr two max. I started training more vr two max and my vr two max improved. I saw tremendous improvements very fast because it was a new stimulus. Now given that I've reached a more high level of v two max, I need to train a lot more and put a lot more effort to see additional improvements. So in order for me to get to a v two max of 70, I have to commit to a lot more training that I have done so far. What kind of workouts did I do specifically? I did three zone two cardiac workouts per week for forty five to fifty five minutes each workout. Zone two is a steady state low intensity heart rate zone between 60 to 70% of your maximum heart rate. It's low intensity enough that you can maintain nasal breathing and you can theoretically talk. The reason I did a lot of zone two cardio is because it lays the foundation to your cardio fitness, but I also did interval training. The type of interval training varied between how much time I had and how I felt. Sometimes I did one minute intervals at maximum effort followed by one minute of rest and repeated for eight rounds. At other times, I did three to four minutes at near maximum effort followed by four minutes of rest and repeated for four rounds. In total, my interval workouts lasted anywhere between fifteen to thirty five minutes. A 2019 meta analysis of 53 studies saw that short intervals less than thirty seconds, low volume less than five minutes, and short term less than four weeks are an effective and time efficient way to increase VO two max. However, they found that to maximize VO two max adaptations, long intervals over two minutes, high volume over fifteen minutes, and moderate to long term over four to twelve weeks was better. So when it comes to increasing VO2max, longer intervals and more intervals and doing them for a longer period of time is better. Just doing more cardio and longer cardio sessions, both low intensity and high intensity, is better for increasing VO2 max. With age, your VO2 max is inevitably going to decline because of aging. However, you can still keep it in the elite category of your age group. Ideally, you want to maintain an elite VO2 max that's ten to twenty years lower than your chronological age. A 2013 study found that octogenarian athletes, so athletes in their eighties, had an average VO2 max of 11 METs, which is 39 milliliters per kilogram per minute. Some of them even had a v o two max of 50 per kilogram per minute, which puts them into the category of elite 30 year olds and the lowest mortality risk. The untrained octogenarians who didn't train had an average v o two max of twenty milliliters per kilogram per minute, equal to 5.7 METs. Having a VO2 max of five METs or 17.5 per kilogram per minute is considered the independence line below which you're not able to take care of yourself properly and you're at an increased risk of death. Compare that to the 80 year old athletes who have the ear to max and cardiorectal fitness above average of 30 year olds. There's another case report of a Norwegian 80 year old man whose ear to max was comparable to a normal active 35 year old. That's insane. Staying fit and working on your cardiovascular fitness for as long as possible is one of the best things you can do for your health and longevity. Imagine having the VO2 max of someone who is 40 years old at the age of 80. Now imagine what your health would be if you had the VO2 max of a 80 year old at the age of 80. I would much rather prefer to have the VO2 max of a 40 year old at the age of 80 than the VO2 max of 80 year old. That's why I set myself the goal of having an excellent VO2 max for the rest of my life. For example, in my forties, I aim to have a VO2 max of an elite 20 year old, which is possible. And when I'm 80 years old, I intend to have the elite VO2max of a 40 year old. How do you measure your VO2max? You can do that at a local sports lab or you can run a Cooper test. I got my VO2max measured in my retreat in India at a longevity clinic inside a five star hotel. If you want to join me there to get many other longevity and fitness tests, then check out the link in the description. Next week, I'll publish a video that outlines the best way to increase VO2 max. I'll cover workouts, diet, and supplements. So make sure you subscribe and click the notification bell to get notified when that video comes out.