Last year there was a study that claimed that people go through two massive bursts of aging after their mid forty's and early sixty's. I already talked about the routine you should follow in your early forty's to slow down aging. But in this video I'm going to talk about the specific changes you need to do in your sixties to maintain better health and live longer. Watch until the end for a complete weekly routine. One of the most significant changes that happens in your sixties is the loss of muscle mass and bone density. In people over the age of 75, falling makes up the leading cause of accidental deaths. That's because of low bone density and low muscle mass that leads to deadlier falls in people who are frail and weak. You should do some resistance training and lift weights already in your forties. But especially after your sixty's to reduce the risk of frailty and falling. You can't build bone density with just walking or a healthy diet. You need weight bearing exercise that overloads the bones to trigger growth. You don't need to go super heavy like a power lifter but you should lift something that you can lift only for five to 10 times several times per week. With age you also become slower because of a loss of fast twitch muscle fibers. To maintain and build these fast twitch muscle fibers you need to be lifting heavy and running fast. It's been seen that elderly people who do just endurance training have much fewer fast twitch muscle fibers whereas those who do strength training have significantly more. So you have to be stimulating the fast twitch muscle fibers with strength training and sprinting. The next thing I wanna talk about is sleep and melatonin because both decline with age. Melatonin peaks in your puberty and drops relatively low in your sixties. This coincides with the loss of sleep that's seen with aging as well. Older people sleep less, they get less deep sleep and they recover slower partly because of this drop in melatonin. This is just a process of natural aging, but it's not healthy. It's actually partly responsible for the decline in overall health because melatonin is not just sleep hormone. It's also a powerful antioxidant and anti inflammatory hormone. One obvious way to counteract this decline in melatonin is to supplement with it. In your sixties, you would need approximately three milligrams of melatonin or even more to fill the gap of how much melatonin your body is making now versus what it did when you were younger. When it comes to sleep duration, then older people sleep shorter, but it doesn't mean that it's healthy. You still want to sleep seven to eight hours and follow the fundamentals of sleep optimization. Get bright sunlight in the morning to regulate your circadian rhythm. Block out blue light before bed to prevent the disruption in melatonin production. Take your melatonin three milligrams at least two to three hours before bed. Sleep in complete darkness. No night lights or sneaky blinking lights. I wanna take a quick break to tell you about the bond charge infrared sauna blankets. My go to way of getting twenty minutes sauna sessions on the go without needing to spend an hour to warm up a regular sauna. Taking the sauna is in my opinion one of the best things for your overall health and heart function. Studies show that taking a sauna regularly is associated with sixty three percent lower risk of sudden cardiac death, sixty three percent reduced heart disease mortality, forty six percent lower risk of hypertension, and forty percent reduced all cause mortality. This is mediated by an increase in body temperature and increased heart rate that mimic a cardiovascular workout while at the same time improving arterial stiffness, endothelial function, blood flow, immune system function, blood pressure, and metabolic health. It doesn't matter if it's a traditional wooden sauna, an infrared sauna, an infrared sauna blanket, or anything else that elevates your body temperature above what's normal. Bon charged infrared sauna blankets have the advantage of shining far infrared light that can penetrate deeper into your tissues than regular saunas can. It warms up in two minutes to the optimal temperature of 70 degrees Celsius and it's low in EMF. You can get a 15% discount by heading over to boncharge.com/seamlund and use the code seam for 15% discount. Alright back to the video. When it comes to nutrition then people over the age of 60 need more protein. A 2014 study discovered that after the age of 65 low protein diets were seen to be associated with an increased risk of mortality whereas before 65 they were not. Remember that we want to be lifting heavy weights to maintain muscle and strength. Well, eating more protein will give you better results in that. A 2022 systematic review and meta analysis of 28 randomized controlled trials discovered that when doing resistance training, a higher protein intake in the elderly leads to greater lean mass and strength compared to a lower protein intake. After the age of 60, you want to get over 20% of your calories as protein which would translate to about 1.6 grams per kilogram per day. But you can also eat more than that. Up to two grams per kilogram which is roughly 0.8 to one gram per pound per day. You also don't wanna be doing extreme intermittent fasting because it's harder to build and maintain muscle that way. Instead of eating protein only once a day, you want to have at least three up to four protein meals that provide at least thirty-fifty grams of protein per meal. At the end of your life you need to have a reason to be alive. Lack of purpose or lack of meaning in life are associated with increased risk of mortality and poorer quality of life. Whereas having a purpose is linked to longevity. The reason for that is you'll take care of your health more, you'll have better mental health and you'll have almost like a physical resilience. The desire to be alive and not give up. It's actually very strange and quite real. People who don't have any desire to live or they don't have a desire or willingness to live, they die sooner. Whereas people who have this passion, energy and willingness to be alive, they are more resilient. There's also very interesting research that the offspring of centenarians have been seen to have a three times higher likelihood of having a strong purpose in life than age matched controls. It might be that a lack of purpose has a genetic effect and the offspring of centenarians live significantly longer than their peers because they have some genetics that increase their purpose in life. You might ask, what's my purpose in life? I'm just a regular person. I don't have any big mission to cure cancer or go to Mars or something like that. That's okay. Your purpose in life can be as simple as friends and family. It can also be religion or having a dog. You just need to find the things that bring you the most joy and happiness in your life. Speaking of having a purpose, for most elderly people it's grandchildren and children. Unfortunately, research shows that people spend significantly less time with their children after their fifties when they become adults and they move out. This means you'll rarely see your children and grandchildren after that which can be a major source of despair and sadness. The research is quite clear. Having children and grandchildren is associated with greater longevity. Not only because you'll have some people to take care of you when you are sick or support you financially but also because of the happiness, the purpose and the mental health benefits. Most people will retire in their sixties and they're not going to work for the rest of their life. This is thought to be a great thing because now they can do whatever they want. True, working a corporate job or a nine to five can be boring and depressing as hell. That's why I worked my ass off in my early twenties to become self employed and financially independent. However, I'm never planning to retire and I'm going to be doing what I love for the rest of my life. In your sixties after you retire your real job you should still try to find a quote unquote second career doing something that you love. Maybe it's painting, music, entrepreneurship or something else like that. The research does support that working at something you love and not retiring is beneficial for longevity because it provides a source of purpose and meaning as well as keeps your brain engaged which protects against dementia. The worst thing in life would be to spend the last years of a life living alone with no friends or family, you can't exercise because of the physical pain, you forget things, everything is boring, you have no hobbies and you spend all of your days doing nothing, waiting to die. There are also some supplements you could take specifically after your sixties. We already talked about melatonin being important. A dose of three milligrams or above. Another antioxidant that declines with age is glutathione. Older people have higher inflammation due to aging called inflammaging that accelerates aging and death. Supplementing with glycine and NAC in large doses has been seen to counteract that age related inflammation and increase chlorthalidone status. It also improves physical function, cognition, body composition and many other hallmarks of aging. The recommended dose for glynaq is a hundred milligrams per kilogram each. So if you're eighty kilograms, you need eight grams of both. It sounds like a lot but it's what's deemed optimal by the studies and what's needed after the age of 60. The next supplement is omega threes because after your sixties, your risk of dying to heart disease and getting Alzheimer's in your eighties increases. Supplementing omega threes and having a higher omega three index has been seen to reduce the incidence of heart disease deaths and dementia. Vitamin d three and k two can also be beneficial for heart disease prevention. There are several studies showing that k two and d three supplementation reduces atherosclerotic plaque. Nattokinase is another beneficial supplement for reducing atherosclerotic plaque and reducing the risk of blood clots. You do need a higher dose again of ten thousand fibrinogenic units per day. You shouldn't take it with blood thinning medicines though. Speaking of heart health, aged garlic extract is also very versatile by improving lipids, blood sugar, blood pressure, visceral fat, and kidney health. However, you shouldn't take it with blood thinning medicine like warfarin. Alright, let me give you a complete longevity plan for over sixty's. Lift weights three times a week for forty five minutes each. Incorporate some sprinting into your workouts to maintain fast twitch muscle fibers but also go for regular walks and cycling. Get seven to eight hours of sleep and take three milligrams of melatonin or more. Eat a predominantly whole foods diet emphasizing protein. Get one point six to two grams per kilogram of protein or 0.8 to one gram per pound per day divided into three to four meals. Spend time with your family and try to make new friends. Cultivate your purpose and work on some goals that you enjoy such as art, entrepreneurship, or even politics if you want. The key is to not think of yourself as someone who is old and waiting to die because that's going to accelerate your demise. If you stay physically and mentally engaged you'll age slower and you'll live longer. If you want to learn more about the details of my decision making then check out my full evidence based longevity routine video next.