Over the last few years, I've measured hundreds of biomarkers, taken dozens of blood tests and read dozens of scientific studies on what truly predicts long term health. And here's what I've learned. Not all biomarkers are equal. Some have a massive impact on your longevity whereas others have a smaller effect. So in this video, I'm going to rank a 100 biomarkers from the most critical to your longevity all the way down to the least important based on my reading of the literature and opinion. Time stamps for everything are down below. And to make it even easier, I've put together a free blood work cheat sheet that you can find in the description. Alright, let's begin. The first marker is a resting heart rate. Now obviously your heart rate is the most critical biomarker you have because if you don't have a heart rate, then you're dead. And, you know, when it comes to overall health and, associations with heart disease mortality, overall all cause mortality, then, resting heart rate does have a pretty significant effect. There is a pretty linear relationship between higher resting heart rate and increased risk of mortality. One meta analysis of over one point two million people did find out that everything above 45 beats per minute was associated with increased risk of, mortality. And, usually people with lower resting heart rates have better cardiovascular fitness, better cardiac function, they have less cardiac stress, etcetera. So, a healthy heart doesn't beat super fast, that's just the truth to it. Now, of course, there are some situations where a low resting heart rate can predict mortality, but it usually coincides with also a low HRV. So if your heart rate is slow and you also have a low HRV, so there is less interval between the heartbeats, then that is typically a sign of, you know, usually it's a sign of aging, but it can also be a sign of some comorbidities that predict future mortality. So a healthy heart goes with a slow resting heart rate, so something like less than 45 beats per minute to less than 50 beats per minute, and also a high HRV, so there's a high variation between those heartbeats. Resting heart rate, and HRV are also a good indicator of your nervous system balance, your autonomic nervous system balance. So it's a good proxy of overall recovery and stress as well. So I'm gonna put it in the vital tier because, I I do think that it's pretty reliable and, it can be a good indicator of overall fitness, cardiovascular fitness and cardiac, function. Next up, I'll take, h s c r p, highly sensitive c reactive protein. So this is a marker of, systemic inflammation. And, similar to resting heart rate, there is a linear relationship between higher CRP levels and all cause mortality risk and, heart disease risk as well. And I do think that it's, pretty, reliable as well. Of course, HSCRP can fluctuate if you get some infections. It doesn't have to be some serious illness, just a bacterial infection or something like that. Your CRP levels can acutely, rise. But, generally speaking it is a pretty good marker of overall systemic inflammation. If you're an otherwise healthy person then your CRP levels tend to be close to zero, something like 0.1, 0.2, 0.4 or something like that, and anything above one point zero tends to be indication of, unwanted inflammation that could be improved upon. So I'm gonna put it into vitals here because, it's a very, I guess, universal you can find very, strong associations with, all different types of chronic diseases with high CRP levels. Next, VLDL. So this is a type of lipoprotein and, this is different from all these other types of cholesterol and lipoproteins, and VLDL tends to be more atherogenic than other types of, cholesterol and lipoproteins, so I'm gonna put it in the vital tier. It has a stronger association. LDLP, so this, refers to particle count, LDL, particle count, low density lipoprotein particle count, and, when it comes to atherosclerosis and heart disease then, the particle count is, a much stronger predictor of, risk than, the amount of cholesterol, the amount of LDL, for example, alone. So the particle count generally is a much better predictor. Of course, there's gonna be some situations where people with high particle count necessarily don't develop heart disease, but in, the vast majority of cases, you don't wanna take the risk. So I'm gonna put it in the vital tier for that. Homocysteine, so this is, a marker of inflammation as well. High homocysteine can increase endothelial dysfunction and, cause endothelial inflammation, so and it is associated with heart disease risk as well. It can be also a proxy of methylation, so if you have poorer methylation, then you tend to have higher homocysteine levels, but the association with heart disease, for example, is much weaker and, compared to some other markers like HZRP and VLDL. So I do think it is important but, I wouldn't, become very worrisome or very worried from, slightly elevated homocysteine because it can also fluctuate quite a lot depending on if you've been infected with some virus recently or some bacterial infection or something like that. So, yeah, it is quite important but not in the, vital, tier. Respiratory rate: so this biomarker you can measure also during your sleep. For example, Oura ring measures your respiratory rate, other sleep trackers can measure this. It It essentially just refers to how many how fast you breathe during your sleep. And, generally speaking, healthier bodies, healthier hearts, healthier humans, they tend to breathe slower in their sleep because, it's it's about like oxygen efficiency. So, you don't need to have a very fast heart rate, you don't need to breathe very fast. A lower respiratory rate is a sign of better overall health. And, you know, the association with mortality is not that researched. There are a few studies showing that a respiratory rate above 16 breaths per minute, is associated with increased mortality and a lower respiratory rate is associated with lower mortality. I'm gonna put it in the important tier just because of the, limited amount of research in this, biomarker. VO2max. So VO2max refers to your maximal oxygen consumption during exercise and, you know, you've probably heard a lot that VO two max is one of the biggest predictors of longevity in humans, which to a certain extent can be true, but it obviously has some limitations. So VO2max is a good umbrella marker of your overall cardiorespiratory fitness as well as how your other organ systems are functioning. So to have a good VO2max, you not only need to have, you know, a fit heart, but you also need to have fit lungs and, good circulatory system, good metabolic health, generally speaking, because to achieve a high VO2max, you need to be exercising. You're not gonna have a high v two max by just sitting around and having a bad diet, etcetera. So if you have a high v two max, that warrants that you are exercising or training your v two max to some degree. Generally, if you have high VO2 max, then, you're doing a lot of things right. So that's why I'll put it in the vital tier. Let's take something like a body fat. So body fat percentage, you know, everyone knows that if you're obese then you're harming your health. I think we're past that phase by now and, body fat, is interesting. It can tell you a lot about your metabolic health. If you just look at someone's body fat percentage, you can pretty much predict what their blood work is also going to be with, quite good accuracy. You can predict their VO2max as well with their body fat percentage quite accurately, other biomarkers as well. So it is a good, you know, rule of thumb to kind of this Occam's razor that, okay, if you just look at your body fat percentage you can get a pretty good overview of someone's health. Now it is more important for men. In women there's a smaller association with body fat percentage and mortality risk Unless you're in the severe obesity category for men, it's anything above 15% body fat is associated with increased mortality. So men need to be slightly leaner with subcutaneous fat, so the fat under the skin. For women, the subcutaneous fat matters a lot less or there's a much weaker association with mortality. But, regardless, body fat percentage alone can have its, flaws. I'm gonna be putting it in the important tier because of that reason, that it doesn't fully grasp the nuances of someone's, metabolic health and overall health. You need to look at all the subtypes of body fat, mostly like visceral fat mass and subcutaneous fat mass, etcetera, liver fat, etcetera. You know, if someone has a high body fat percentage then they also have high amounts of visceral fat. That's, you know, we can be pretty sure of that in most cases, but, body fat alone can be misleading. What about BMI? So this notorious, biomarker of body fatness or estimated body fatness. Now, of course, BMI has a lot of flaws. If you have a lot of muscle then your BMI can be in the overweight category. So for example, my BMI is twenty five point five, so I'm slightly over the limit for normal body weight, but my body fat percentage is 10%, my waist circumference is very low, my visceral fat is extremely low, my metabolic health is excellent, so, metabolic health is excellent, so, I have a higher BMI because of my muscle mass. Now, some people take it too far. So they'll say, although my BMI is thirty one, I have muscle and therefore BMI is useless because I have muscle and I'm healthy. Well, to have a BMI of thirty one, you still have slightly too much body fat for your frame, for your height, because even if you're muscular, to have a BMI of thirty one you will need to be having too much body fat to reach that BMI to begin with. So you're probably something like, okay 15% body fat, which isn't the end of the world but it's not the most optimal, as well for males especially. Now if you're some sort of pro bodybuilder then maybe you can have a BMI of thirty one thirty two with sub ten percent body fat, but, you know, even in that scenario of being a pro bodybuilder, a mass monster with a BMI of thirty two, of leanness, of pure muscle, then it's still not healthy. I think that having that much mass is gonna wear down your organs eventually and just, you know, to maintain that amount of muscle mass you need to be doing something, you know, either anabolic steroids or just eating insane amounts of food or something like that. So even if you are sub 10% body fat but your BMI is thirty one, then I would argue it's not healthy. So it the the BMI is more of like a population, like a tool to analyze populations, not individuals specifically. So I would, you know, put it in the not significant category. It has some validity. Like I said, if your BMI is thirty one, then you probably have too much body fat or you are just, you know, a mass monster, which is also not healthy, so I wouldn't ignore the BMI completely. But if your BMI is, let's say, twenty five point five, twenty six, maybe twenty seven at the most, then it might be that, yes, you have slightly more muscle than the average person which increases your BMI and that not isn't necessarily a bad thing. But, at some point the insane BMI numbers, even with very leanness, a lot of leanness can be still harmful to overall health. HRV, so heart rate variability, I mentioned it in the context of the resting heart rate that if you have low resting heart rate and high HRV, then that's a good sign of heart health and, it also tends to be a sign of lower biological age because of when you're younger, you have a lower resting heart rate and you have a higher HRV. With age, you see the opposite of that, that your heart rate increases and your HRV decreases. So if you have lower heart rate and high HRV, then that can be a good sign of lower biological age. Now the thing with HRV is that, at least with these commercial devices like the Ourang, Whoop, other, you know, fitness trackers, people get a lot of different results with them. My average HRV is a 100, a 100 plus, where some other people might have a HRV of forty, fifty, 60, 20 or something like that. And they are generally still healthy. They exercise regularly, they eat a good diet, they sleep, etcetera. So they follow all the things they need to do, but their HRV is still, you know, let's say 45. Doesn't matter what they do, it stays at 45. So there might be some, just individual differences between people that some people just have a lower HRV. What matters more in the context of HRV is how does it fluctuate. If you see that your HRV is always the same, doesn't increase, doesn't decrease, then there's nothing there's not that much to worry about even if it's, you know, 45 or 35. What matters more is that, okay, is it increasing or is it decreasing? If you see a sudden drop in your HRV, then that can be a predictor of some infection. Usually, your HRV drops a few days before you get sick, or if you have some infection, you can pretty accurately predict getting future sickness with your HIV, but ideally, you know, your HIV should slightly be increasing over time. If it stays the same then it's not the end of the world. If it's slowly decreasing then that it could be something to, be worried about. So that okay, maybe you're too stressed out, maybe you're not getting enough sleep, maybe you're not walking enough, you're not getting enough, downtime, whatever the case may be. So I'm gonna put it in the important tier that HRVE is important but, it has again limitations and a lot of individual differences. Let's take waist circumference. So, waist circumference just measuring the narrowest point of your waist, which is usually around your belly button, and, waist circumference can be a good predictor of your visceral fat mass, so visceral fat around the organs in between the muscles. If you have a very big waist circumference, you just have like this beer belly, this pot belly, that is usually a sign of high amounts of visceral fat. So that can be, you know, a useful tool to just assess, your visceral fat mass. And there we there are studies finding an association between higher waist circumference and increased risk of mortality in a linear fashion. So lower waist circumference tends to be a sign of better metabolic health and better body composition, that you have less visceral fat mass. But waist circumference can of course be influenced also by your height, your just genetics, where you store your fat, etc. So it is important but it doesn't tell the full story. What tells the full story is the waist to hip ratio. So waist to hip ratio is a better marker than, waist circumference because you measure your waist and you measure your hip circumference. You divide your waist circumference with your hip circumference and then you get a particular number. The lower the number then, the better it is. So your waist should always be narrower than your hips, because of that reason. So, if your body stores fat around the hips, which is what females tend to do more, then that's a sign of better health. If your body stores a lot of fat around the belly and your hips don't have that much body fat, then, that means your body is preferentially storing the body fat as visceral fat mass, which, is worse for your health than, the subcutaneous body fat. So while we're on the topic of fat mass, then visceral fat mass, I do think that it's, vital. So visceral fat is both a cause and a driver of insulin resistance and diabetes. So, visceral fat accumulates around the organs, in between muscles and, around the liver, around a heart, etcetera. So, it is, quite bad that it increases the risk of heart disease and definitely drives metabolic syndrome, drives metabolic diseases like diabetes, insulin resistance, etcetera. So you wanna have lower visceral fat, generally speaking. Now of course you can have, you, you, you probably won't be able to have zero visceral fat. Zero is probably going to be unhealthy, but on the lower end, less than average is what you want to aim for. So the average person might have 500 grams of visceral fat. That's, you know, I would consider it okay, but, not ideal. A more optimal amount of visceral fat mass would be something like 300 grams and below that. So let's say a 100 to a 150 grams would be excellent result. You know, my lowest visceral fat score was, 54 grams. Now, I don't know if it's too low or not. There's no data about having such extremely low visceral fat mass because, it will be very rare for someone to have that much and probably there aren't enough people to research that. But you know, I'm not particularly trying to keep my visceral fat at 54, maybe a hundred, hundred fifty is already, you know, excellent and, no need to keep it lower than that. And liver fat as well, I would put it in the important tier for the same reason, as you know, pretty much another another location of the visceral fat. You can measure it separately. You can measure your visceral fat mass with a DEXA scan for the with an MRI and, liver fat you can also measure with, full body MRI or there's also these, liver scans that you can do separately. So, higher amount of liver fat will will increase the risk of, non fatty non alcoholic fatty liver disease and also increases the risk of insulin resistance, for example. And the threshold for that is 5%. If our, liver fat is over 5%, then that's categorized then as, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. A healthy amount of liver fat is something like two to the 3% or average amount is two to 3%. Mine was at 1.5% to the last measurement, so, that is lower than average which, is better, generally speaking. Let's take white blood cells, so a type of immune cells that, do fluctuate based on infections and inflammation and they do vary quite a lot. So if you're you've been secretly sick or something you, you were exposed to some pathogen, even if you don't notice it, you know, your body gets sick several times throughout the year without you ever getting symptoms. Now, you're not technically sick, but you get exposed to various bacteria from your food or from the environment, various viruses when you're traveling around, and, in most cases you don't ever actually feel the symptoms, but your immune but your immune cells do respond to those, infections. So, that's why I would, you know, put it okay. White blood cells, can be very noisy because of that reason but, chronic low white blood cell count, for example, can be indication of poor immune system functioning. If they're too high then they can be a sign of autoimmunity but, generally speaking, there's a very wide range of white blood cells that can be categorized as healthy because of the reason that it fluctuates quite a lot. As long as they're chronic as long as they're not chronically low and as long as they're not chronically very elevated, then, they tend to have, a lot of variety in in that. So I think it's okay in in that sense. Lymphocytes as well, another type of, white blood cell and, they are these white blood cells and lymphocytes are part of the pheno age calculator that is, used to assess phenotypic age, but, they do fluctuate quite a lot because of their reasons that I alluded to earlier. So I'm gonna put it in the okay, tier. Albumin. So this is the most abundant protein in the body. It's also part of the pheno age calculator and albumin I would put in important tier. It's mostly a reflection of your nutrition status, so, how much protein are you eating, how many calories are you eating, etcetera. And, individuals with, malnutrition tend to have low albumin status. So albumin is important but, I would say it's not as vital as these other biomarkers here. What about muscle mass? So you've probably all heard, muscle mass is associated with reduced mortality and longevity, which is true to a certain extent, but, obviously people take it too far that, you know, bodybuilding isn't associated with increased longevity. So, there's obviously an optimal amount of muscle mass that matters. If you're a mess monster, then that shortens your lifespan. If you're a sarcopenic, frail, you're skinny, skinny fat, whatever you wanna call it, that also is associated with increased mortality. So with muscle mass, you just wanna be lean and athletic, slightly lower body fat and with adequate muscle mass. I like to think of it, okay, look at it like gymnasts or calisthenic athletes. These individuals tend to have the optimal amount of muscle mass. In my opinion, they're not too bulky, they're not massive, they have lower body fat percentage and they're athletic. So and even then muscle mass is a is a weaker predictor of mortality than muscle strength or even muscle power, so I'm going to put it, you know, it's not it's not insignificant obviously because if you have sarcopenia and low muscle mass, you're frail, then you are increasing your risk of mortality. So I'm going to put in the okay tier because, just focusing on the muscle mass alone, it's it misses the full picture that the reason you want the reason you get to the muscle mass is through strength training, and strength training is a bigger predictor of mortality than than muscle mass and it's also a better predictor of overall health, whereas too much muscle mass can even be harmful and counterproductive. So grip strength is usually to used to assess your upper body strength. So it is, you know, similar to VO2max that is just a sign of, okay, how much are you exercising, how good is your diet, how good is your overall health, but the problem is that you can be like a fat powerlifter with insane grip strength like an arm wrestler or something but, still be overweight and still be obese even. So that's why grip strength in my opinion alone individually is not a good marker because, yeah, you can be a fat powerlifter and have hypertension, have diabetes and all those things. So, but it's also not insignificant because if you have weak grip strength, you're otherwise healthy, then that's a sign of poor muscle strength. And, we know especially the older you get, the more important muscle mass and muscle strength become. So I'm gonna put it in the okay tier because of the limitations of body composition. With VO two max, it's different because to have a high VO two max, you also need to be with at least normal body weight and slightly leaner, and you need to have, you know, good metabolic health as well because you're exercising to achieve a higher VO two max. You it's very it's almost impossible to have, like, a lead VO two max and also be obese at the same time, whereas with grip strength you can be obese and have insane amounts of grip strength, if that makes sense. So grip strength in combination with low body fat, good resting heart rate, lower blood pressure, etcetera, that's what you want. But just focusing on the grip strength, isn't necessarily the way to go. A perpendicular lean mass index, so this is a subtype of muscle mass. It measures only the amount of muscle mass in your arms and legs And, I do think that it's slightly better than total muscle mass because it specifically looks at your arms and legs, which are the limbs that are most active doing strength training. So to have big arms and legs, to have a lot of muscle mass in your arms and legs, you need to be doing some form of strength training. You know, let's say that it's calisthenics or you're bench pressing a lot or doing squats or something like that. We know that you're with this marker, it tends to be more associated with healthy behaviors as well. Whereas with total muscle mass, you can be quite, let's say overweight and still have quite a lot of muscle mass. Of course, the same can apply to the epicenter lean mass index. It doesn't look at body fat, it doesn't include body fat into this calculation. So you can have high body fat and high epicenterology lean mass as well. So I'm gonna put an okay tier because of that reason. But, yeah, generally speaking, higher muscle mass in the arms and legs is, I think, a better marker than total muscle mass because it's, something that you can build specifically with, strength training that trains arms and legs. Creatinine, so a marker of kidney function. Now, creatinine is influenced by a lot of things such as, you know, your muscle mass. If you have more muscle then, you're breaking down more protein, your protein turnover is higher, that creates more creatinine, your kidneys have to filter it, so your creatinine marker can be higher if you have more muscle mass and especially if you exercise as well on top of that. So your protein breakdown is higher from the exercise. And, protein high protein diets can also increase creatinine. Taking creatine can increase, creatinine in some individuals. Now I think that generally healthy kidneys will maintain normal creatinine even if someone is exercising and even if someone has higher muscle mass and even if they are taking creatine, for example, you know, I have quite a high amount of muscle mass relatively speaking. I exercise regularly. I've taken creatine and my creatine levels are quite low. They're, less than one gram per deciliter. Whereas some individuals who also exercise, they eat the same amount of protein or even less and and they take creatine, they might have a much higher creatinine levels, so 1.2 or something like that. If creatinine is above the reference range, I would I would still suggest that it's suboptimal even if you are otherwise healthy because it either means that your kidneys are with slightly worse worse function, that they're not able to keep up with the increased protein intake or the increased muscle mass, or it might refer to, yeah, that you're you just have too much muscle or you're just exercising too much. Either or that, you know, you don't necessarily need to exercise hours and hours at the gym to be in good health and, arguably excessive exercise will be harmful to your overall health. So I don't think that insane high creatinine is something to just ignore, but it obviously is very influenced by things like muscle mass and, things like, your protein intake. So, yeah, don't ignore creatinine if it's especially above the reference range. If it's slightly elevated, let's say it's one or 1.1, then, yeah, it might be influenced by muscle mass. If you don't exercise, you, don't have particularly a lot of muscle mass, you don't eat a lot of protein and your creatinine levels are elevated, then, yeah, that will be something to more I'd be more current concerned about. EGFR is, a systemic kidney health marker, so umbrella kidney health marker, reflects to more like filtration rate of the kidneys, how well are your kidneys are working and, eGFR can be calculated from creatinine, which I just said has some limitations. If you calculate eGFR from creatinine, then, you can get a worse outcome. You can have a lower eGFR and you might be even in the kidney disease range if you calculate your eGFR from creatinine in some cases. So that's not- so in that case it's not a good marker if you calculate it from creatinine, but you can calculate eGFR from cystatin c, which makes it more accurate because cystatin c isn't influenced by muscle mass, it's not influenced by exercise, etcetera. It looks like your pure kidney function. So I'm gonna put EGRF R into the vital tier because I think kidney disease is quite underrated. It's not in the top, well it is in the top 10 killers of the world, but it's not in the top five. But, kidney disease does contribute to heart disease and most people with kidney disease die to heart disease. So eGFR is important. And with age, even if you're healthy, you're expected to see a decline in kidney function because of natural aging. Like organs wear out eventually and kidneys tend to be one of the ones that go first. Cystatin c, I just alluded to that it's better than creatinine. I'm gonna put in the vitals here because it, actually reflects your actual kidney function. What about epigenetic age tests? So these are these different types of, biological age tests. Now, I'm gonna put them in a noise tier because there's quite a lot of studies showing that these markers fluctuate day by day. They can fluctuate based on the time of the day. If you get sick, they increase. If you recover, they decrease. I mean, it makes sense that it does so, but that's because of there's a lot of noise or it just illustrates how much noise these tests can have. You're not gonna get a reliable reading of your biological age with most of biological age with, most of these commercial tests out there. Now, again, they might be useful in the research area and for assessing general population health, but, if you are individually trying to, okay, calculate your biological age, keep track of your biological age, then you'll never know when is the best time to test it. Is it is it is is today the best time? Is it tomorrow? Is it at 10AM? Is it at 2PM? You know? Do you need to be fasted or not fasted? So you end up just wasting your money by trying to figure out what's the best way to test these things, and you end up with a lot of noise that even doesn't tell you anything useful. So let's say you take, whatever biological age test based on a blood spot. The number says, okay, you're five years younger than your than your biological age. What are you gonna do with that information? You're probably not gonna change anything in your lifestyle. You're You're probably gonna still follow the same workout plan, follow the same diet plan. Hey, because I'm five years younger, I'm gonna keep trying to do the same general lifestyle routine. And, you know, maybe the next time you get a different result, you might get a higher result because Matt Cabralain, he, did an experiment on, I think, four tests. He took two of the tests at the same time, so eight tests in total, and all of them gave different results. All of them had even he took the test at the same exact time. He had one test said, okay, five years younger, the other said seven years younger or whatever the number is. So even if you take the two tests at the same time, you're gonna get different results, which just means that there's a lot of noise with these, most of these tests. I would put the Dunedin pace here as well and the noise for the same reason. Now it might be slightly better than most of these other epigenetic tests, but it has, I guess, like, it feels like there's, this inherent noise built into the test because of the unpredictableness of your speed of aging and, your biological age. Like, it makes sense, yes, that your biological age would fluctuate depending if you're sick or not, how much you exercise, how much you sleep. It makes sense. And it also makes sense that it might fluctuate with the circadian rhythms that in the morning it's a different result and in the evening it's a different result. But, you know, you as a consumer, I'll just end up with an empty wallet by doing that because you don't know the most optimal time to test this. And even if you do follow the optimal time, you can get insanely different results even if you test them at the same time. So, yeah, I would put it in the noise tier for that reason. Pheno age, so this is, also a biological age test that's calculated from 10, blood markers, things like white blood cells, lymphocytes, albumin, creatinine, blood sugar, MCV, RDW, alkaline phosphatase, etcetera, and your chronological age. So it can be a bit more accurate because of that reason. You can actually see specific blood markers and see which test or which mark marker is out of the range. You can see, okay, you have high blood sugar. Yes. That's gonna increase your phenotypic age. You have high inflammation, high CRP. Your phenoH is gonna be higher than if it's if it's low. So it's more practical in that sense. You can see, okay, your kidney is is bad, your liver is bad, your blood sugar is bad, your inflammation is bad, whatever it is. But the pheno age obviously has its limitation as well because all of these markers fluctuate. Your CRP fluctuates, your white blood cells fluctuate, lymphocytes fluctuate, creatinine can be influenced by if you take creatine or if you have muscle mass, etcetera. So even then, it's not an an actual representation of your biological age, but it's better than, these epigenetic age tests in my opinion because you it's first of all, it's cheaper. You just do the 10 blood tests. It's gonna cost you maybe $70 less than a 100 for sure. And you will see specific markers that need improvement. Okay. You need to get your creatinine lower. You need to get your alkaline phosphatase lower, whatever the case may be. But as a number itself, it is insignificant. I guess it's just wrong to call it biological age. It's not an actual represent representation of your biological age. It's more about, okay, what is your blood markers predict your phenotypic age would be? Next, we have bone density. So bone density, I think, is very underrated. And, when you're older, let's say you're over 65, then, low bone density can be a matter of life and death, quite literally, because if you fall off the stairs or you fall on ice or something like that, you break a hip then, there's like twenty five percent of people who break a hip after the age of 70 or something like that, they're gonna die within the next year. So, a huge death sentence falling and breaking the hip in elderly people and to reduce the risk of dying you need higher bone density and higher muscle mass and the individuals with higher muscle mass and higher grip strength and higher bone density, they're less likely to fall in the first place. So, bone density is just a good marker of overall health and robustness, how robust is your physical body. If you're gonna fall, are you gonna break your hip? Are you gonna break your spine or something? You know, it's, your physical robustness and physical resilience. So I do think that it's vital in that sense. Bone density peaks when you're 30 and, you can measure it with a DEXA scan. I think everyone should get a DEXA scan at least before the age of 45, you know, once just to see what their bone density is because after the age of 45 it's gonna be be much harder to build bone density. Especially women, you wanna get your bone density measured before menopause because after menopause you see a pretty big drop off in bone density because of, the loss of estrogen. FEV1. So this is a marker of lung health and, lung force. There are like actually some Amazon devices you can use to breathe into it, to measure it and, you know, obviously it contributes to your VO2 max. If you have high lung function, your, or if you have a high lung function, yeah, your VO2 max will also be predictably higher, but individually it's I would say, it's okay. It's not insignificant, but, you know, VO2max is gonna be more important than your this specific, lung marker in my opinion. It's, you know, it's more specific for some, lung diseases, COPD, for example, that smokers probably will see a much rapid drop off in this lung function, but if you compare VO2max to this lung function marker then, VO2max will be more important, generally speaking. Let's take LP little a. So, this is an atherogenic lipoprotein and, it's a pretty established marker of atherosclerosis and it's unfortunately genetic. I will put it in the vitals here because, it's, causally linked to atherosclerosis and it's something you don't wanna necessarily ignore. You can measure it once and see what is your genetic set point. There's not a lot you can do to influence this or lower it. Yes. You can lower it to a reasonable degree with lifestyle, with a healthier diet, losing, weight, inflammation, these things, they can move lp a slightly, but, it's very unlikely that you'll take your Lp from 300 to 10 less than 10, which would be the optimal range. But you wanna be at least aware of your Lp levels, the same way you wanna know your APOE four, genotype. So, just measuring it once can be insightful and then you can be more careful with the other risk factors. So if you have high l p double a, then, okay, you need to be more careful with the other lipids because your l p w a is, already high. Oxidized LDL. So, LDL that is oxidized is more likely to be atherogenic. I'll put it in the vital tier. Usually if you have high inflammation than, and high oxidative stress, then your LDL is also more likely to be oxidized. And when it comes to oxidized LDL, then lower tends to be, better. Now LDL isn't the only thing that can oxidized. HDL can also get oxidized. So oxidized HDL is as harmful as oxidized LDL. So just keep that in in mind because HDL is often called to be like a good cholesterol, but, oxidized HDL and HDL can get oxidized. So oxidized HDL is also atherogenic. Moving on with testosterone and, this is a marker that most guys care most about. They don't care about their, you know, other blood markers usually, they only care about their testosterone, but when it comes to overall health then, you know, testosterone is obviously important but it's not particularly vital. Yes, low testosterone can increase your risk of diabetes and can increase your risk of obesity and heart disease, but it's not the low testosterone itself. It's, the obesity that ensues or the metabolic dyslipidemia and insulin resistance that ensues from that chasing high testosterone or like, you know, chasing high testosterone, isn't going to protect you from developing heart disease or developing insulin resistance. You can be obese and have high testosterone. You can, be on anabolic steroids. Obviously, bodybuilders inject steroids and they inject testosterone and they can have very high testosterone levels, but, they can still have a high risk of heart disease for other reasons. So testosterone is cardio protective in, I guess like normal amounts. And there's actually another very strong association between testosterone levels and muscle mass, which is usually what, men, care about when it comes to testosterone that I'm gonna boost my testosterone so I have, you know, of course higher libido, higher sex drive, but also higher muscle mass. But there's actually no strong association between testosterone and muscle mass. There was one clinical trial that looked at young healthy adults, males and, testosterone and DHT, which is, the, the androgen primary androgen in the body in males, testosterone nor DHT predicted muscle mass. What did predict muscle mass was androgen receptor density. So, androgen receptors are you can think of them like these, docks, harbors on top of cells onto which testosterone attaches to and then exerts the gene expression, protein synthesis, all those things that actually make the muscles grow. If you have low amount of androgen receptors, you have a lot of testosterone circulating in the blood, but there's no harbors, there's no ducts for the testosterone to get attached to, then it's, you know, I wouldn't say useless, but, you know, it's, it has less, it has no effect on the muscle growth then because there's no, these ducts where you can attach to. So these androgen receptors are what predict muscle growth more than a testosterone and a DHT. Now androgen receptor density is very genetic. Some individuals just have a lot more androgen receptors. You can boost or increase androgen receptor density as well with certain, things like creatine, does it higher protein intake? Does it, lifting weights or strength training? Does it high volume training? All those things can increase androgen receptor density, but obviously it's very genetically determined as well. But, yeah, testosterone is important. You don't want to have low testosterone, but there's no reason to try to aim for whatever very high testosterone. If you look at, let's say, lifespan studies, then very high testosterone might shorten lifespan, maximum lifespan. Now, of course, is it, it's a balancing act again. So the takeaway message would be that you don't want to have low testosterone, but there's no inherent benefit to having insanely high testosterone either. If you look at the studies of testosterone and associations with mortality, then over seven hundred is associated with lower mortality. So maybe let's say, okay, eight hundred is a sweet spot for naturals. 800 testosterone total test, the, the total testosterone. You know, when it comes to testosterone, then free testosterone obviously is more important than regular testosterone. So, free testosterone is, the bioactive testosterone and, it is more important than regular testosterone, but at the same reasons, testosterone can only get you so far when it comes to body composition, but you don't wanna have low testosterone. LH and FSH, these are hormones that support testosterone production And, yeah, I think, yeah, they're obviously important. So I'll put them here in the same group as, these other testosterone. SHBG, so this, is a binding protein, sex hormone binding, gobolin and, it attaches to testosterone resulting in lower free testosterone. So if you have very high testosterone but low free testosterone, which is what we want, we actually do wanna, you know, prioritize free testosterone, There is association with high s s p g and increased mortality because s s p g usually, rises due to certain, dietary restrictions and just, getting older. With age, you see an increase in s s p g. Severe calorie restriction can increase SSBG. Carbohydrate restriction does it and, you can lower SSBG by increasing carbohydrate intake and increasing calorie intake, for example. So I'll put it in the okay tier. I think, there are situations where you can have high SFG and also have adequate testosterone and other good free testosterone. So it's more about symptom management. Okay. Do you have symptoms of low testosterone? Do you have symptoms of high SSBG? And SSBG can also rise if you have, liver dysfunction or iron accumulation in the liver. So there are other things that SSBG can indicate, but, most commonly SSBG reflects energy status. How much calories are you eating as well as a carbohydrate intake. If you are low carb, then your SHBG tends to be high and your feed testosterone tends to be low. And that's why in pretty much all studies, high protein low carb diets tend to result in lower free testosterone for that reason because of the increased SHBG levels. What about estradiol? So E2, the primary female hormone, it's also important for males. It's a cardio protective, so, if you have extremely low estradiol levels it might increase your risk of heart disease. So there is a sweet spot for both males and females when it comes to estradiol. So I'll put it in the important tier. I wouldn't call it a vital because it's not literally determining your progression of certain, chronic diseases, but it's, again, like a proxy measure of your total health, status. And of course after menopause, estradiol levels, estrogen levels in, women decline quite a lot. And, you know, even for quality of life it's, very important. So a lot of women do hormone replacement therapy after menopause and that improves their sleep, improves their body composition, improves their aesthetics, increases their bone density, etcetera. So, after menopause, you know, depending on who you are, like some, hormone doctors would say that estradiol is, vital after menopause. Some people will say that it's overhyped and it's not necessarily that important. So I'll put in the important. I do think that after menopause, most women would benefit from, hormone replacement therapy probably in in most cases. Resting metabolic rate. So this is interesting. So you can measure it at a lab and, you know, depends on your goals. If, you're trying to lose weight, then just having a higher resting metabolic rate will be quite useful. You'll be able to eat more calories and still be able to lose weight. When it comes to, let's say, maximum lifespan, in a lot of animal studies, a higher resting metabolic rate is usually associated with shorter lifespans and, you know, calorie restriction works through reducing your resting metabolic rate to a certain extent. That is that's one of the mechanisms. It's obvious in there's no strong relationship between resting metabolic rate and longevity in humans. It's probably not studied and it's virtually impossible to study it, So I'll put it in not significant and I'm not sure how accurate these tests are either. You know, I've measured my resting metabolic rate. It was very high. I'm not even sure that I'm eating that many calories as my resting metabolic rate showed, because, you know, I'm eating maybe 2,500 calories a day and my resting metabolic rate showed the test showed that my resting metabolic rate was 3,100, which is sounds a bit high. So again, the test might be inaccurate. But generally speaking, you know, everyone has their energy balance. Even if you don't measure it, there's a certain energy balance your body has that is influenced by many factors, your health, your diet, your exercise, etcetera. Your resting metabolic rate is mostly influenced by your muscle mass, and, hormonal health and metabolic health. But, I would put in the not significant because, yeah, the the test can give you a number, but your real real calorie intake needed to maintain your body composition might be completely different. So the only way the most accurate way to know your metabolic rate, your resting metabolic rate, would be to track your calories and, weigh the food weigh the food, do it for a few weeks and see how your body composition changes. If you're gaining weight, then you're in an energy surplus. If you're losing weight, then you're in a energy deficit. So that would be a more accurate way to measure it. Another thing that is often talked about in this context is body temperature. And, yes, lower body temperatures are associated with higher lifespan in animals, but in humans again it's very limited evidence. Interestingly, obese people have higher body temperature because, you know, they're eating more food and their body's processing more food, if that makes sense. So your metabolic furnace is, higher. So, yes, I guess, like, in the extreme examples, body temperature can be insightful. If you have very high body temperature, you know, I wouldn't say that a high body temperature alone is harmful. You have to look at all the other factors. If you're obese and you have high body temperature, then it just means that you're probably just eating too many calories and you're obese. If you have high body temperature, you're lean, you're healthy, you're metabolically healthy, then it's potentially a good thing because you'll feel warm. You'll, you'll probably feel better a little bit and, and you'll have more energy. And likewise, very low body temperature, like being hypothermic is obviously also not good if you, so your body temperature decreases at old age as well. So old people tend to be colder if you've, you know, hugged your grandma or especially people on their deathbed, you know, their hands and feet are very cold, so their metabolic rate is decreasing, their body temperature is decreasing, etcetera as a sign of, dying, for lack of a better word. So, you know, I wouldn't think that you want to have hypothermic body temperature. I don't think it's an indication of good health. You're just gonna feel cold all the time. Your hands and feet are gonna be cold. You know, I've been in those kind of situations in the past where I was, you know, not deliberately restricting my calories. It just ended up being like that way. So I wouldn't say that it's a good sign of anything. So I will put it in the not significant. It depends all on the other markers. What's your resting heart rate? What's your other blood markers, what's your body composition, etcetera. If you have slightly lower body temperature and a lower metabolic rate, but you're lean, you have good metabolic health, other biomarkers are good, your resting heart rate is good, your VO2max is good, your grip strength is good, you enjoy life, you have high quality of living, then, they don't matter that that much that you have low body temperature or low resting metabolic rate. But if you have low body temperature or low resting metabolic rate, you're obese, you have other comorbidities, you have poor fitness, etcetera, then, in that case they're hard just, you know, I guess, yeah, it just depends on the other markers. ALT, AST and GDT, so these are liver enzymes. I'm gonna put them in the important tier because they do matter and, you know, obviously liver disease. If you're drinking a lot of alcohol, these liver enzymes are gonna increase. If you're taking certain medications, these, markers can also increase. So it just reflects, liver burden. So, so, yeah, depends on your lifestyle. If you have very high liver enzymes but you're otherwise healthy then it usually can be traced back to some, let's say, underlying, not, not in fiction, but, you know, heavy metal toxicity or some environmental toxicity, mold toxicity can raise liver enzymes. So, it warrants some further investigation if you have high liver enzymes and you're not drinking alcohol, for example. If you're drinking alcohol and you have high liver enzymes, then, you know you know the reason for that. ALP as well is, I put it separately from these liver enzymes because it tends to tell a little bit more than just regular liver enzymes. It can also reflect inflammation, so I'm gonna put it in the important tier as well for that reason. It's, something that can be influenced by exercise, so that's why it's not in the, like, vital tier that it absolutely tells a perfect story. It, is influenced by multiple factors. ApoB. So, I'm gonna put it in the vital tier because I do think that, there's, enough evidence to suggest that APO B is, causally implicated in atherosclerosis and APO B again is better marker than regular cholesterol because, it reflects the particle count. So the particle count is what matters for atherosclerosis and, ApoB reflects particle count whereas regular LDL cholesterol doesn't necessarily reflect particle count. There can be an association between high LDL and high ApoB, but not always. So, what you want to do is still measure your ApoB for a better overview of your cardiovascular, risk and, of course, atherosclerosis is a disease of, many decades. It's about taking, less less risky option. I personally don't wanna take a risk with lipoproteins. I have a family history of heart disease, so I don't wanna, like, just take a chance that, okay, maybe it's not associated with risk and I don't necessarily need to. There's no health benefits to having high ApoB. So, you know, that's the way I see it. If there's no benefits and there is a potential risk, even if the potential risk is, you know, five percent, ten percent, then I don't need to take the risk. It's the same with a seat belt. You know, if you go to the store that's one kilometer away, you know they're out. Yeah. I mean, in most cases, it's nothing's gonna happen. But there might be just this one single occasion where not wearing a seat belt means that you're gonna get hit by a truck. And in that case, you know, you might die. And wearing a seat belt might save your life in that situation. So why take the risk? It's the same with, like, a helmet. IGF-one. So insulin like growth factor one. It's interesting a a lot of bodybuilders also use IGF-one for increasing muscle mass. IGF-one, in high levels can be or it is associated with, cancer is also associated with heart disease and diabetes. So, it's more like a hormone of growth. If you have very high IGF one levels, then, it means your body is in a more growth state and that the growth can be pathological. You can grow cancer cells. Again, bodybuilders use that growth to build muscles and grow muscles, but, high IGF-one levels are associated with cancer and it, definitely can promote development of cancer. So I'll put it in the important tier. I personally do consider IGF-one also one of the hormones related to maximum lifespan in humans. There's quite interesting, association between the longest living people and lower IGF-one levels. So the superchindenarians, they tend to have lower IGF-one levels and, IGF-one levels are the highest during puberty when your body is growing the most in that state of life. It can be quite useful because you know, you can have low bone density, you can be shorter if you have low IJ of one. So there are reasons you need IJ of one, especially during puberty, but it's, at a certain age, it flips. It's, this antagonistic pleiotropy, which is a very common phenomenon in across biology, across species. And there's evidence that it occurs in humans as well, that what's good for you in early life isn't necessarily good for you later in life. So this constant growth, if you're a baby, yes, you need to grow. It makes sense. You need to grow. You need to develop into an adult to, just develop physically and, and, achieve good muscle mass and bone density, etcetera. But later in life, this excess growth can lead to cancer and we can see it from the studies where high IGF one levels are associated with increased cancer. So, yeah, supercentenarians tend to have lower IGF one levels, which might, you know, there's a lot of things that determine living very long, but the genes that regulate IGF-one are one of the potential candidates for that. APO a, so this is another lipoprotein usually a counterpart to APO b. You can have a very good, overview of your metabolic health and cardiovascular risk by looking at the APOB, APOB ratio. But I do think that it's less important to than APOB actually they're going to put it in the so if you have very low APOE, then, it usually works hand in hand with, insulin resistance and, some aspects of metabolic dysfunction. So in that sense, it's useful, but I'm gonna put it in the okay tier because of, it's not directly related to your metabolic health, if that makes sense. Blood pressure. So, the biggest cause of death in the world is heart disease and high blood pressure is one of the biggest drivers of heart disease. High blood pressure also increases your risk of Alzheimer's, dementia, or cause mortality, stroke, nothing that you want. So, you want to get your blood pressure pretty normal as fast as possible when you do discover you have elevated blood pressure. Now blood pressure obviously fluctuates every day. It's, higher in the morning, lower in the evening. The lowest point is at 6PM. So if you are measuring your blood pressure, you should measure it every at the same time every day. Getting your blood pressure drawn at the doctor once a year is not gonna tell you anything because you might be nervous. You're probably nervous at the doctor like, oh my god, what's my blood pressure? So that's gonna increase your blood pressure. So what you wanna do is sit down for at least five, ten, fifteen minutes and, relax, you know, don't be caffeinated, etcetera. Then measure your blood pressure at the same time every day to see a certain trend. But, yeah, high blood pressure is, is called the silent killer because you can't feel it. You can't feel if you have a high blood pressure, so, it needs to be measured. CAC, so coronary artery calcification. So it looks at the amount of calcium in your arteries. Now, this is obviously vital because if you already have calcium in your arteries, then it means that you have advanced stages of heart disease and plaque accumulation. So the calcium is the last stage of plaque accumulation in the arteries. It It means that there was already previous damage and the body has repaired it. So it's the last stage. Now calcium, it means that the calcium is keeping the plaque more stable. It's less volatile. So So it is safer than the soft plaque that is, not calcified. It's more volatile. It can lead to blood clots and a stroke. So, so calcium in the arteries is is, you know, it's healthier than, soft plaque, but it means that there's, first of all, be in previous damage and it means that you already have advanced stage of heart disease and other sclerosis. So it's just like a retrospective, marker of, previous damage. So if you have higher amounts of calcium, the higher it is, the higher your risk tends to be for future heart disease because it means that you've gone through atherosclerosis and it means that you already have advanced stage of a heart disease. CIMT. So this is carotid intima media thickness. It can be done with an ultrasound, so zero radiation, very cheap, very fast. And, it looks at the narrowing of the arteries with the ultrasound and, this can be useful for identifying also soft plaque, so that's something that's not calcified yet. Now the most accurate way to assess soft plaque is with, is with a CT angiogram. Unfortunately that has a lot of radiation, so you don't necessarily want to do it unless there is a medical need. But the CIMT has zero radiation and it's pretty, cheap. And I'm gonna put it in the vital tier because, of that reason that it also reflects your atherosclerosis burden. The c a c, coronary calcium score, so this one obviously involves some radiation. If you're a young person, you don't need to do it or you shouldn't really do it unless there are some risk factors, but at some point, you know, let's say after your fifties, it's generally recommended to get at least one calcium score analysis just to see what your risk is because, the older you get, the higher the risk of heart disease is and, you know, heart disease is a disease of decades. It progresses, it starts already in your youth and it takes a very long time to progress and in your fifties you can start to see the calcium accumulation in the arteries. It can also happen sooner obviously. So the the issue with the CAAC is that because it's so, you know, it has a higher radiation exposure, you can't do it, you know, something like once a month or something. Even once a year is not recommended for most people. So you never know, okay, what is the intervention that increased your CAC or what are interventions that lower it. So you don't necessarily know, okay, when did the calcium come and why did it come for, for what lifestyle factors? What we do know is that high blood pressure, insulin resistance, diabetes, smoking, dyslipidemia, being overweight, not sleeping enough, those things, are all risk factors for heart disease and atherosclerosis. Smoking is the biggest one. Diabetes is the second one. High blood pressure is the third one. So you wanna obviously manage all the risk factors but, you can't predict it that linearly that even if you're not smoking you can still develop coronary atherosclerosis. It's just that if you are smoking the risk is significantly higher. Iodine, so, first mineral, first nutrient biomarker, you know, I think iodine does influence your thyroid functioning. If you're low in iodine, your risk of hypothyroidism is higher. But in my interpretation of the literature, iodine isn't necessarily going to prevent hypothyroidism. You can have normal iodine level. You can eat all the adequate amount of iodine from a diet even without supplementation, and you can still have hypothyroidism or you can have the symptoms of low thyroid. So, you know, you could put it in the not significant category based on that, but low iodine status in pregnant women especially does seem to predict certain birth defects and mental capacities in the children. So it is important for that, but I'm gonna put it in the okay tier because, just taking iodine or increasing your iron intake isn't necessarily going to fix hypothyroidism, which is the most common reason people take iodine. Pregnant women do it for their pregnancy, but, you know, it's not always something you want to do because high iodine status, high iodine intake can also lead to, autoimmunity and hyperthyroidism. So you are, you know, it's one of those supplements you want to be careful with. You do want to consume adequate dietary iodine, milk, seafood, iodine salts are the most common sources of iodine. So, yeah, you do want to eat iodine foods, but, I wouldn't necessarily start taking iodine supplements. And it's very easy to get your RDA for iodine. Like a glass of milk already has, something like 50 to 60% of your RDA for iodine. So let's talk about thyroid hormones t three and t four. I'm gonna put them in the okay tier because I, you know, I think that, you can have so so rather than just chasing numbers, I think it's more important to chase the symptoms of hypothyroidism. So let's say you can have slightly lower t three, the active form of thyroid hormones, but you can be still in perfect health. You can have high energy, you can have excellent body composition, you can have good metabolic health, etcetera. So you can have zero symptoms of low thyroid, but have slightly suboptimal t three levels or t four levels. So in that perspective, there's nothing to worry about t three and t four. If you have symptoms of low thyroid functioning such as you're gaining weight, you have brittle nails, hair loss, those things, some insulin resistance can also be caused by low thyroid, then, yes, you want you want to improve those markers. Maybe that involves improving your island status, maybe it involves just eating more calories, which I think is the most common reason for low thyroid hormones. People are just not eating adequate amount of calories. So there are the things that influence these numbers and it's more important to focus on the symptoms. And when I'm talking about, again, longevity or lifespan, then, low thyroid levels similar to IGF-one tend to predict, longevity in humans. So is it like like a lower resting metabolic rate, a lower resting metabolic rate in animals at least, there is some association with increased lifespan. In humans as well. There tends to be some association with lower thyroid functioning and, greater longevity. Now having low thyroid functioning can be a double edged sword because if you have low thyroid functioning, you're gaining weight, you're gonna get high blood sugar, etcetera. So, in that case, it's harmful to longevity because you increase the risk of heart disease, you increase the risk of metabolic syndrome, etcetera. So, yeah, I would, you know, I guess I'd put it in the okay tier. I'm personally not particularly worried about t three, t four. If they're in the normal range, then I'm happy. If they're slightly below the normal range, then I wouldn't immediately be concerned. You would have to look at all the other biomarkers as well, such as your metabolic health. If you have good metabolic health, you're lean, you have good sleep, good sex drive, all those things, your skin is good, your hair is good, then, just the t three, t four, aren't that important. Maybe increasing your calories or increasing your carbohydrate intake will fix that. So, yeah there's a lot that goes here. So next up we'll take progesterone and this is most relevant for women for pregnancy and menstrual cycle. So it's obviously important for that. It's a important marker of overall fertility and sexual health. So So I'll put it in the important tier. Pregnenolone is, a precursor to other steroid hormones like testosterone in men as well. So yeah, I'll put it in the important tier that, so it doesn't have that much like clinical relevance, if that makes sense, that, pregnant alone levels aren't going to predict your future risk of heart disease as much as these other biomarkers, even apo, even albumin and even homocysteine in here. But I'll put it in the important tier because it, is a precursor to the other sex hormones. TSH, thyroid stimulating hormones. So we just talked about thyroid and, you know, my opinion is the same. If you have high TSH levels, it means that your body is trying to produce more thyroid hormones. It detects inadequate thyroid hormones, but, TSH, there's a very weak link with longevity in humans. So in, or actually even in some of the centenarians, high TSH levels are associated with longevity. So it's again, goes goes back to the idea that low thyroid might have some beneficial effects of on longevity. But again, you have to take into account all the other biomarkers. TSH alone is, you know, not significant, although I'm gonna put it in the okay tier because, you know, it does tell a story of, okay, is your body trying to produce more thyroid hormones or not? BNP, so this is a marker of cardiac stress. I'm gonna put it in the important tier. So let's say in the extreme examples, if it's very elevated then, it can predict future outcomes. In most people it's just gonna be in like a normal reference range somewhere in there, so I wouldn't try to chase this number that okay, I need to get my VNB into some optimal range. I don't need to you do you need to do that. If it is, elevated then, I mean it's usually gonna be associated with cardiac problems already, to begin with. Hemoglobin so, refers to red blood cell status, iron status and oxygenation. So I think it is important. There's, you know, it's gonna most impactfully impact. So it's most impactfully going to influence your energy status, your exercise performance. If you have low hemoglobin, then you'll probably just feel winded, tired, chronic fatigue, those things. If you have higher hemoglobin, then you'll have more energy, you'll, be able to exercise more, etcetera. There's a relationship between higher hemoglobin and higher b o two max because your body is able to carry more oxygen around or it is carrying oxygen around. So it is important from a quality of life perspective for sure. And with hemoglobin as well as other, red blood cells there's tend to be like a u shaped association with longevity and mortality that if it's too high that is associated with increased risk. And if it's too low, that's also associated with increased risk. Iron, I think it is, I would, you know, put it in the vital tier because, very high iron levels will cause damage to the endothelium and increase the risk of heart disease. So iron is something you don't wanna ignore. Men are more vulnerable to high iron levels or not more vulnerable, they tend to have higher iron levels because men don't menstruate and, they accumulate iron more because of that reason. So, high iron levels are something that you definitely want to address. The fastest way to do it is blood donation and, other ways have to do with, increasing chelating iron. So fiber, coffee, different types of, polyphenols or foods that contain polyphenols with fiber tend to, chelate iron. But the fastest way, if you have very high iron levels, something like 300, 400, 500, then, blood donation is the fastest way to do that. And there are potential health benefits to blood donation as well, independent of the, the removal of blood. Maybe a lot of it is due to iron, but, you know, there might be some other mechanisms as well that actually can be helpful and, good for your overall longevity. Ferritin, I'll also put it here for the same reason, vital here, for the association between iron and atherosclerosis. Uric acid. So, uric acid is an antioxidant and, if it's very high, then that can be a sign of, increased oxidative stress in the body, increased inflammation. But there is actually an association between low uric acid levels and dementia and other chronic diseases as well that, has been identified. So I do think it's important. Now how high should it be? How how low is too low? How high is too high? That depends a lot on the individual. If you exercise more, you might have slightly higher uric acid levels. If you don't exercise at all, you have low uric acid levels then, that is associated with increased risk of dementia, for example, as well. So a healthy amount of uric acid, somewhere in the reference range tends to be optimal. HDL cholesterol. Now HDL is important, but, the thing with HDL is that higher HDL doesn't reduce the risk of, heart disease. We've, known that because of, the clinical trials where you raise HDL with interventions such as niacin and it doesn't reduce the risk of future heart disease events. So HDL is more like a marker of your metabolic health. People with insulin resistance tend to have low HDL. If you're in good metabolic health, you tend to have higher HDL. The thing with HDL, as I said earlier, is that it can also get oxidized. Oxidized HDL is also atherogenic and oxidized HDL increases the risk of atherosclerosis. So, yeah, extremely high HDL isn't necessary. It's not better. Something like, 40 to 60, maybe 80. 40 to 80 is a good sweet spot for HDL. If your HDL is super low, then that's usually the sign of, metabolic syndrome or insulin resistance. Hemoglobin a one c and average your average blood sugar and, glycation marker. So I think it's, vital because, you know, blood sugar is quite important and, if your hemoglobin A1c is elevated, it means that your average blood sugar is going to be higher as well. So definitely better to keep it lower. So something like 5% is better than 5.5% or 5.8%, five point eight being, prediabetes, you don't necessarily need to keep it super low. Like four percent is probably unnecessary, 4.5 is also probably unnecessary. If it is four point five percent then, you know, that's excellent, but, let's say 5% I would say is, optimal. Less than 5% is a optimal sweet spot. Fasting insulin as well, a vital marker of overall metabolic health. If your fasting insulin is very high then it tends to be a sign of insulin resistance and poor metabolic health and, typically lower fasting insulin is, better. So less than seven is associated with lower mortality risk. Fasting glucose. So I do think fasting glucose is important, but, you know, the issue with fasting glucose is that it can fluctuate a lot. You got a bad night's sleep, your morning fasting glucose is higher, you, you know, exercised a little bit too close to bed or something like that, your fasting glucose is going to be higher. You're stressed out, your fasting glucose is going to be higher. So, you know, individual fasting glucose markers aren't illustrative of the entire story of your overall health. What's probably better is, a CGM reading. So, what's your average blood sugar across the day? How does your blood sugar respond to different foods that you eat? How does it fluctuate throughout the day? So a CGM experiment is something that most people could do and I think it's very useful. Don't get too caught up with, some swings in your blood sugar. What matters more is that, okay, if it goes up, if it stays elevated, that's a sign of this insulin resistance that your body isn't producing enough insulin to lower the blood sugar. If it goes up and comes down, then, that's a sign that your body is producing enough, insulin. But, yeah, fasting glucose usually is influenced by your sleep quality and stress levels and those things, even how much carbohydrates you've been eating over the last few days. So it's it's got its limitations if you just look at it in the morning, for example. Fructosamine, another glycation marker, specifically I'll put it in the important tier. Now, it's not, you know, as bigger of a predictor of longevity as uric acid or liver enzymes or something. But let's say for skin health, there is some, association between fructosamine and skin aging as well because, it reflects a glycation of proteins. So yeah. I'm the clinical value is lower than uric acid, for example. So I guess I'll put in the okay tier for that reason for, you know, if you're specifically interested in skin and aging, then it can be important. It's not as important as, hemoglobin one c or, you know, other things, but it's, still relevant. Triglycerides, I personally think that triglycerides are vital because, they, tend to be a good reflection of your overall metabolic health. If you have very high triglycerides, then it means your body's not able to burn the fatty acids for, fuel. And, usually it happens in insulin resistance and, diabetes. So your body has low metabolic flexibility. With healthy metabolic flexibility, your body is able to switch between fat and carbs, glucose for fuel. So you should have normal blood sugar and normal triglycerides, but very high triglycerides are, yeah, a sign of metabolic syndrome and, diabetes and pre diabetes and you'll also have high triglycerides with, if you consume more alcohol, so that tends to raise triglycerides and if you have a lot of visceral fat and liver fat because, visceral fat is a proxy of, insulin resistance. Omega three index. So, yeah, in my opinion, omega three index is vital because, there is a pretty strong association between higher omega three index which reflects your omega three status, your red blood cell omega three status and, people with higher omega three index have lower mortality, lower heart disease, lower Alzheimer's and lower dementia. And, the only reliable method of raising your omega three status is consumption of omega three fatty acids. Now the source can be omega-three supplements, can be fish, can be seafood, can be, you know, chia seeds if someone is able to convert ALA to DHA, which a lot of people aren't able to do due to genetics, but generally speaking, a higher omega three index reflects higher omega three intake. So fish, seafood, grass fed meat, omega three supplements, chia seeds, algae, algae oil is actually equally as good as marine based omega three supplements so you don't necessarily need to consume, fish based omega threes. Alder oil I think is actually probably better even than most, most omega-3s from a fish. Omega six to three ratio: so this reflects the ratio between omega-3s and omega-6s. Yes, there is an established association between higher omega six to three ratio and increased risk of mortality and heart disease. I would say it's, usually due to the low omega three index. So you can have a high omega six to three ratio, especially if you have low omega three index. If you have high omega three index, then omega six status matters a bit less when when you control for that. R d w red cell distribution width, it's a marker of, red blood cells and, I'll put it in important tier so it reflects, yeah, red blood cell function and anemia risk and it's also one of the markers in the PhenoAge. Next up, we have platelets. So, platelets are important for the risk of, blood clotting. So, they help to, wound heal, they help with wound healing and, but in high amounts if your blood is too clotting then that increases the risk of stroke and, thrombosis, for example, so there is a sweet spot. If you have very low platelets then you can't stop bleeding. You might have internal bleedings and other problems easily bruised or, you know, those things, especially for older people if, if you're not able to, stop bleeding as an elderly person then you're more likely to die if you fall. For example, again, if your platelets are too high then that can be a risk of stroke and, thrombosis. So I do think platelets are quite vital. Most people tend to have normal platelets, so, again, it has a pretty wide reference range. Only in the extreme examples if it's too high or if it's too low you need to be worried about. But as a marker itself, it tends to be vital. MCV, so mean corpuscular volume, it looks at the size of your red blood cells and obviously it can, be useful for diagnosing some blood disorders, anemia, etcetera. So I'll put it in important tier similar to RDW. LDL cholesterol. So this is, obviously gonna get a lot of, you know, different opinions about that. You know, again, I've said earlier already it's the LDL particle count, the other lipoproteins like LPA, APOB, and, those kind of things that actually drive the process of atherosclerosis. LDL alone individually is okay. I think, you know, it's not, the most accurate way to assess your heart cardiovascular disease risk. ApoB is better. Oxygenase LDL is better. LpDLA is better. LDL, LDL particle count is better. So, you know, I'll put in the okay tier for that reason. Next up we have mean corpuscular hemoglobin and this looks at your average quantity of hemoglobin. I'll put in important because, again, more related to blood oxygenation status and, anemia risk. One blood urea nitrogen is a marker of, kidney health and nitrogen, balance, putting it in the important tiers. If it's, too high that can be an indication of a slightly worse kidney function. It can also mean that you're just, eating too much protein or your body is getting, excessive amounts of protein more than it needs. DHEA sulfate. So, another androgen and, it's okay, I think, for men at least, DHEA has very little relevance or at least the practical outcome from DHEA is, much less relevant than it is for women. So, very rarely would you want to, like, optimize your DHEA levels. It's more about the testosterone, other androgens and other sex hormones. It is okay, you know, in most cases, if you have optimal testosterone, you also have optimal DHEA, but, just let's say for men, boosting your DHEA levels is not gonna do much for your average, testosterone levels. For women it tends to be a lot, I guess, more impactful. It can might even improve body composition for women, but, yeah, I'll just put in the okay tier. Vitamin D, I would say, is vital, especially unsupplemented vitamin D. It would, just reflect how much sunlight are you getting? Are you getting adequate amount of sunlight? And, we know that, vitamin D is involved in your immune system functioning, inflammation, hormones, every virtually every other process inside the body. So, definitely normal vitamin d levels are critical to health and ideally you wanna have your vitamin d levels normal without supplementation. Now it is healthier to supplement your way out of low vitamin d than to keep your vitamin d levels low, but you're not getting all the benefits of the sunlight from just the vitamin d supplement. So, yeah, ideally get vitamin d from the sunlight. If it's the wintertime and you can't get sunlight, then, take the supplement and try to keep it there. If your vitamin d levels are very high, you get sunlight and you take the supplement then, insanely high vitamin d levels in that combination might be harmful because vitamin d does increase calcium levels in the blood. So if you are taking vitamin d, you should also combine it with vitamin K two and magnesium and ideally boron. HOMA IR, homeostatic model of insulin resistance. So this is just calculated from your fasting insulin and fasting, glucose. So it is a pretty useful calculation just to look at your, incidence asitivity. But because your fasting glucose does fluctuate quite a lot, I'm gonna put it in the important tier. Red blood cells are also important. So quality of life, even energy levels, fatigue levels, all these red blood cell markers that I've talked about I'll put in the important tier. Hematocrit, so, another red blood cell marker and, high hematocrit can be an independent predictor of a stroke, again similar to platelets. So I'll put it in the vital tier for that reason. Most people are gonna have semi normal hematocrit levels but, you still don't definitely wanna don't wanna ignore it. ESR, it's, erythrocyte sedimentation rate. So it's a red blood cell marker but more related to inflammation. It's, quite useful similar to CRP. It has just a little bit less data overall when it comes to, mortality risk or something like that. You know, I'll put it in the important tier for that reason. And, it's lower than CRP, for example, although it's a different marker, because it because of it has less data available. LPPLA two. So this is a marker of vascular health and, you know, it can be a proxy of a soft plaque accumulation. For example, I'm going to put it in the, you know, it's vital in that sense. If your LVBLA2 levels are very high, then, I mean it's gonna be walking hand in hand with other of these vital markers. If you have very high LPplA2 then you'll probably have very high ApoB, you'll probably have very high platelets for example, and put it in the vital tier. So it's definitely something you don't want to, ignore. Electrolytes, so electrolytes: sodium, potassium, bicarbonate, etcetera, magnesium. Electrolytes are vital for health. You need electrolytes without electrolytes, you wouldn't be alive and electrolytes, at least sodium, can be a good marker of kidney health as well. If you have very high sodium levels higher than normal, then that can be a sign of a poor kidney function. So I'm gonna and there is like a very tight range for electrolytes that's optimal. So their body puts a lot of effort in trying to maintain normal electrolyte levels. And if things are out of balance, then it tends to be okay either a sign of severe dehydration, malnutrition or poor kidney function. But I'm gonna, I'm gonna put them in the vital tier. Yeah. Because, this is one of the first things that, you know, gets measured. Total cholesterol, I'm gonna put it into okay tier. It's not insanely insightful for the same reasons I discussed about LDL. It's more about the other lipoproteins, lipoprotein count, particle count, etcetera. B vitamins B vitamins are important because, you know, first of all they're essential. You need B vitamins for survival, but they're also related to methylation etcetera. If you have, let's say, high homocysteine then one of the first things to look at are your b vitamin status, specifically b12 and the folate b9. So, you know, supplementing B vitamins can lower homocysteine as well and, deficient B vitamins are harmful for your longterm health. But the thing with like anything else, very high levels of B vitamins are also associated with worse health outcomes. So necessarily just having your B12 in like 1,200, 1,400 is not a sign of better health than compared to let's say 400 or 700. T IBC, so total iron binding capacity, I think is less relevant than iron and ferritin, but, because iron is such a critical player in heart disease and tends to be ignored, I'm still gonna put it in the important tier because I think iron and ferritin tends to be better markers, transfer in saturation as well. Another iron marker, it's important but, just high iron status for example is more relevant for other sclerosis and usually you can assess an email already with iron and, ferritin. Heavy metals, so things like lead, mercury, I think yes. So let's say you have insanely high lead, insanely high mercury, then you want to get that fixed as fast as possible, similar to like blood pressure over the course of many years. If it stays elevated for many years, heavy metal toxicity will destroy your health, physical and mental. So I would put it there in the vital tier. Now it's something that most people don't measure that often. And to be honest, it's something that you don't really need to measure, you know, very diligently because, it's more again like symptom based. If you have certain symptoms of heavy metal toxicity, then, measuring heavy metals is one of the first things you would want to do. But, it's not something that I would measure in your annual, let's say semi semi annual, blood test. You definitely don't need to measure it like every month or something like that because, you know, you might even be exposed to some environmental heavy metals. So let's say you breathe in air pollution, you drink some water that was, exposed to some lead or mercury or whatever it is, those things will influence your heavy metal test results in the blot at least. So, it's not so that can cause a lot of confusion if you just see, okay, oh my God, my lead is high. Well, it might be just high for one week. And then after that goes back to normal because you were exposed to some lead in your drinking water or something like that. So it's more about, yeah, like symptom based, assessment. Microplastics. So, yes, you can test for microplastics. Currently, the, microplastic tests, first of all, I think the tests so, so, so we are not able to measure all the microplastics in your blood body. We're able to measure only a fraction of them. So even if you get whatever number or test result with the microplastic tests that are out there, it it doesn't mean that you're scot free or that they are somehow, with zero microplastics. But let's say as a marker, if we were to be able to assess your microplastic count, then I do think it's important. Alright. So, like, the problem is that we don't have that much data about what does exposure to microplastics do to your long term health. Yes. Over the last few years, there have been a lot of studies finding that higher microplastic levels in the atheroma for example, are associated with increased heart disease events in people. But the reason these individuals might have higher amounts of microplastics in their atheroma might be that they just follow unhealthier lifestyles or they eat diets that expose them to more microplastics and those diets tend to be more processed foods, more packaged foods, etcetera, which tend to be worse for your health. So obviously I do think that there is a causal role with microplastics and atherosclerosis and other ailments, but we don't know how big the risk is. So let's say smoking is probably still worse for you than drinking from a plastic bottle. So I do think that microplastics are important. You know, there's going to be more research done on them over the next few years. Yeah, interesting to see, what we will find. But right now I do think that you don't want to ignore microplastics. You don't need to go crazy with microplastics. You just need to structure your life in a way that minimizes your exposure to unnecessary microplastics such as, you know, not drinking from a plastic bottle if there's no need, not microwaving your food in plastic tupperware and those kind of things. Cortisol, so stress hormone, but also very important for circadian rhythm regulation. A lot of people so as a biomarker, cortisol is not very useful, at least as a single blood test because, you can have high cortisol in the morning because of jet lag, sleep deprivation, you had some nightmares or something like that, you know, you really didn't get very good sleep, whatever the case may be. So it fluctuates a lot similar to your fasting glucose. So I'll put it in the okay tier. So it's, even less insightful than fasting glucose because, because of the it just depends mostly on your sleep quality etcetera. To know actually, okay, do you have high cortisol or not? You would need to do the Dutch test. So that measures, cortisol and melatonin at different times of the day. So, that would actually tell you is your circadian rhythms aligned first of all and, if you have excessively high cortisol because cortisol is supposed to be high in the morning and drops low during the day. If your cortisol levels are chronically elevated throughout the day, then that tends to be a sign of more dyssympathetic overdrive and chronic stress. TNF alpha. So, this is another inflammation marker, but it is very sensitive. It's more sensitive than, CRP. And, to be honest, I wouldn't really find a lot of value from TNF at least from a single test. You would need to test it again multiple times and, it can be just high for, again, you might exposed to some heavy metals, you might have some infection, etcetera. Those things all influence this result. So I'll put in okay tier. If it's chronically elevated then that means your body is under higher inflammation. Next, we have strength lifts. So it's not specifically like a biomarker. I put it here for, okay, your bench, squat and deadlift. So how, and you know what other tests pull ups, maximum pull ups, you know, just strength exercise, not grip strength, but, your actual lifts and numbers on these exercises. So obviously we talked that muscle strength is a predictor of longevity and mortality. If you have low muscle strength, then it means that you might have low muscle mass as well. And people who are weaker tend to have shorter lifespans and people who have higher strength tend to be healthier. But the obvious, obvious limitation to this is that it doesn't necessarily apply to power lifters. You don't need to become a power lifter. And, obviously none of the longest living people had some insane bench squat and deadlift. So, you know, if you are with a very good back squat, you have a pretty good deadlift for your age. I'm not talking about some sort of elite power lift or numbers, but let's say you're able to squat at least 1.5 times your body weight, ideally two times your body weight. That's more, that's like I think maximal benefits for longevity purposes. You don't need to squat three times your body weight or something like that. Two times is already more than enough. I would say 1.5 times body weight for squat, 1.25 times for the bench and two x for the deadlift of your body weight. Those are already maximal benefits for longevity purposes. It means that you're, you know, stronger than the average person, but you're not really like a crazy powerlifter or you're not even an amateur amateur powerlifter. It doesn't mean that amateur powerlifting would be harmful. It just means that you need to be in some insane strength. You have, yeah, 1.25 for the bench, two x body weight for deadlift, 1.5 for the squat. That's, I think, a pretty good place to be. So I'll put it in the okay tier that, it's not very important to have very high lifts with bench squat, deadlift, etc, but, it's nice to have as long as you're not overweight, as long as you don't have high blood pressure, as long as you don't have high visceral fat mass, you don't have diabetes, etc. Now, Cooper test. So this, Cooper test can be used to measure your VO2max and, it's a more performance based test. So in some ways, it's better than the VO2max test because it means that you're gonna actually run as well. With the VO2max test, it doesn't take into account your physical performance, but with the Cooper test, it considers your physical performance directly. And based on the Cooper test result, you can assess your VO2max. Now do it do I think that is vital? Well, I think that VO2max still, grasps some other components of health that don't that can't be measured with a Cooper test. Although if you have very good Cooper test result, you will have a very good VO2max. So they're, you know, equal in that sense. So it's lower than VO2max. I guess I'll put it in the important tier. If you're able to run fast that means you're healthier, you're fitter and you have a lower risk of mortality, all things being equal. And the last biomarker, which isn't a single biomarker but it's, let's say microbiome diversity, it's a very popular topic, at least it was very popular seven eight years ago: microbiome tests, gut health, etc. Now the problem with the microbiome is that it's very complicated and complex. Yes, gut health has important role in your health and there are certain strains of bacteria that we know are healthier or better for your health or associated with very health outcomes, the issue is that it's still very complicated. So, and if you do, let's say, a microbiome microbiome diversity test, higher diversity tends to be associated with better health outcomes and it tends to be a better, more like a reflection of your diet quality. If you have a very diverse diet, you eat a healthy diet, you'll have higher microbiome diversity and that is associated with better health outcomes. So it's definitely not insignificant. If you have poor microbiome diversity, then, first of all, your gut health might be worse. And, second of all, based on the available evidence, it would, be associated with worse health outcomes in the future. But, not sure how big of a emphasis I would put on that. I'll still put it in, I'll put it in an okay tier because I think the strength lifts are more important than the microbiome diversity. Because, yeah, the gut health topic is a very complicated and the microbiome is complicated. So just the commercial tests themselves can be often misleading. So that's why I wouldn't put that much emphasis on, those, results. So here we go. This was an insane amount of time over one and a half hours And, yeah, it took me a lot of time to record this in one go. But you know, as a disclaimer, this is my opinion about the topic based on my research. And, I tried to grade it based on, how influential a particular biomarker is going to be on your future risk of mortality and other kind of chronic diseases. Things like blood pressure, resting heart rate, bone density, calcium score, vitamin d levels, they are all pretty good predictors of long term future health outcomes. Whereas things like, you know, the Dunedin Paste, PhenoH, they have much smaller predictive power. So yeah, take it for what you will. Hope you found it useful. Check out the free blood work cheat sheet from the description and, yeah, thanks for watching this video.