Are you wasting money on supplements that don't work? Here are the most evidence based supplements backed up by human randomized controlled trials which are considered the highest quality of evidence. I've made separate videos about all of these supplements before. To keep it short, I'm not gonna go into all the details of these supplements, but you can check out the separate videos from the description box below plus the timestamps. The first supplement is taurine. Taurine became one of the new popular longevity supplements in 2023 when a study found that it extended the lifespan of mice by up to twenty five percent. That's all great and interesting, but what about the human clinical trials? A 2020 meta analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials found that taurine supplementation at a dose of zero point five to six grams a day for fifteen days to six months was able to significantly lower blood pressure, cholesterol, and triglycerides, but it had no effect on fasting blood sugar, LDL cholesterol, body mass index, and body weight. However, these patients had liver dysregulation, which includes things like obesity, diabetes, fatty liver, cystic fibrosis, and alcoholism. Another twenty twenty four meta analysis of 25 randomized controlled trials found that taurine at a dose of zero point five to six grams a day improved metabolic syndrome in terms of reducing blood pressure, triglycerides, as well as fasting blood sugar. A 2022 meta analysis of five clinical trials showed that taurine supplementation resulted in a statistically significant reduction in fasting blood sugar, hemoglobin a one c, and HOMA IR in diabetic patients. And a 2021 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials showed how taurine was able to reduce some markers of inflammation such as h s g r p and malondealdehyde but not t n f alpha or IL six. So there is quite a large amount of evidence suggesting that taurine at a dose of zero point five to six grams a day has benefits on metabolic health, especially in people with poor metabolic health. Fortunately, there are also studies showing how taurine supplementation can increase your exercise performance and endurance, which would have a positive effect on your longevity. A 2018 meta analysis of 10 studies found that a dose of one to six grams of taurine a day in a single dose for up to two weeks among a range of people was able to increase endurance performance and time to exhaustion. This means that the subjects were able to run for longer before they reached exhaustion. There were no apparent differences between chronic versus acute supplementation. Another 2022 meta analysis of 15 randomized controlled trials showed that taurine supplementation improved jump performance but had no significant effect on vr2max or rate of perceived exertion. However, another 2021 review found that out of 19 studies, in five of them, taurine supplementation did improve vr2max and time to exhaustion. Overall, taurine appears to improve exercise performance at a dose of one to six grams per day. In the 2023 mouse life extension study, they used one thousand milligrams per kilogram on the mice, which after adjusting for humans would be the equivalent of six grams per day. They did find some benefits with 50% of that. So three grams was already effective, but the higher six gram equivalent dose was apparently better for the mice. Number two, astaxanthin. Next, we have another supplement that's been seen to extend lifespan of mice by 12%. It's astaxanthin. Astaxanthin is a carotenoid that gives salmon their pink color and it also protects them against environmental stressors such as the cold and u e radiation. That's why you see human clinical trials showing that astaxanthin supplementation improves skin anti aging and protects the skin against sun damage. A twenty twenty one systematic review and meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that oral astaxanthin supplementation at a dose of two to twelve milligrams a day was able to improve skin moisturization and elasticity. Another 2021 review of clinical trials saw a dose of three to six grams a day of astaxanthin had benefits for photo aged skin. But asteaxanthin also appears to have benefits on metabolic health and inflammation levels. This 2022 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that asteaxanthin supplementation was able to significantly reduce markers of inflammation such as I l six and malondialdehyde. Another 2020 meta analysis of animal control trials found that asexanthin supplementation reduced CRP and increased HDL cholesterol if taken at a dose of over twelve milligrams a day for over twelve weeks. Another 2022 meta analysis of clinical trials did see that Azaxanthin supplementation lowered LDL cholesterol and marginally reduced total cholesterol as well as systolic blood pressure. Azaxanthin is something I would take daily if you're exposed to the sunlight. And the optimal dose is between six to twelve milligrams a day. Number three, creatine, the most researched supplement of all time. There's plenty of evidence suggesting that creatine has benefits of muscle mass and muscle strength. A 2023 meta analysis of creatine supplementation combined with resistance training showed it improves muscle hypertrophy more than doing resistance training without creatine. However, creatine is also great for the brain and cognitive aging. A 2022 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that creatine supplementation improved memory in healthy individuals. The dosage used was two to twenty grams per day. There's also some evidence that creatine might help with depression or traumatic brain injury. It's often said that you need to take a dose of three to five grams of creatine. But the meta analyses of all these studies that I outlined here suggest that the optimal dose is somewhere between a hundred milligrams per kilogram per day. For me who weighs eighty kilograms, that's eight grams of creatine per day. One fear is that creatine is going to damage your kidneys, but that's not really the case in people who don't have kidney damage. A 2019 meta analysis of 15 studies found that creatine supplementation didn't affect creatinine or urea levels. In another 2020 randomized controlled trial, taking three to five grams of creatine per day didn't impair kidney function in healthy young adults. Number four is omega threes. In my opinion, omega threes are equally as evidence based as creatine because they're one of the most researched supplements of all time. 02/2021 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that supplementation of EPA and DHA at a dose of zero point four to six grams a day was associated with a significant reduction in the risk of cardiovascular disease events and myocardial infarction in a dose dependent manner. Meaning that higher doses yielded greater results. The higher the dose, the lower the risk. Every additional gram of EPA and DHA per day was linked to an additional nine percent reduction in the risk of myocardial infarction. Another 2024 meta analysis of clinical trials found at omega three supplementation improves heart function, reduces inflammation, and decreases the risk of cardiovascular disease in patients with heart failure. On top of that, a 2020 meta analysis of 26 randomized controlled trials concluded that omega threes improve insulin sensitivity and lipid metabolism in type two diabetics. The optimal dose for omega threes is around one point five grams of EPA and DHA combined. Some people might need more than that. Number five is glycine. One of my favorite supplements because it's safe and it can have effects on lifespan. In the interventions testing program, glycine has been seen to extend lifespan of mice by four to six percent, which is quite significant. In terms of the hallmarks of aging, then glycine induces autophagy, which is one hallmark. Glycine lowers inflammation, which is another hallmark. And glycine mimics methionine restriction, which has been seen to extend lifespan in animals. In human clinical trials on diabetics, supplementing five grams of glycine three to four times a day improves hemoglobin a one c levels and lowers inflammation. A three gram dose has also been seen to improve sleep quality and sleep duration. For skin antiaging, glycine is needed for collagen turnover. And the minimal requirement for collagen turnover is twelve grams of glycine per day. When we're talking about glycine then it's also important to mention NAC because both of them improve gluathion production. Glycine and NAC are precursors to gluathion which is a powerful antioxidant in the body. There are several clinical trials on elderly people done over the last few years that have shown how glycine and NAC supplementation improves functional outcomes related to aging such as grip strength, walking speed, inflammation, body composition and other hallmarks of aging. NAC is a supplement that is also worthwhile to take alone because it has potential benefits on lifespan and longevity. A 2020 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials concluded that NAC significantly decreased some markers of oxidative stress such as homocysteine and MDA. But it had no effect on some other inflammatory markers like CRP or TNF alpha. The mean dosage in these studies was five hundred to two thousand milligrams and the participants were thirty to seventy years old. Number seven is TMG also known as trimethylglycine or betaine. It's a great supplement for lowering homocysteine which is one of the risk factors for heart disease. Meta analysis has shown that taking up to four grams of TMG per day for six weeks can lower blood homocysteine in healthy adults. Doses over four grams a day can increase cholesterol but a dose below four grams a day lowers homocysteine without raising lipids. But TMG might also have benefits on exercise performance. Some studies find that TMG increases lean body mass and decreases fat mass slightly. However, those studies are usually quite small with only 12 people taking TMG. When it comes to strength and power then the evidence is a bit more limited. A 2017 review of randomized controlled trials on TMG supplementation showed that out of seven trials only two showed improvements in strength and power whereas the remaining five showed no effect. Overall, a dose of up to four grams a day of t m g is great for lowering homocysteine and it might have some benefits on exercise performance as well. Number eight, collagen. Collagen is something most people would benefit from starting already in their twenties because collagen content in the skin decreases by about 10% per decade after that. Taking collagen supplements has been seen to improve skin hydration, reduce wrinkles and reverse signs of skin aging in many clinical trials, including a 2023 meta analysis of 26 randomness control trials. That's quite a lot of studies. The dosages of collagen peptides in these studies range from as low as two point five grams up to twelve grams. Number nine, hyaluronic acid. Another compound in the skin that declines already in your twenties is hyaluronic acid that maintains skin hydration. A 75 year old person has only a quarter of the hyaluronic acid as someone who's 19. That's why older people have a lot more wrinkles. There are randomized controlled trials showing that a hundred and twenty milligrams a day of hyaluronic acid improves skin condition and decreases skin wrinkles. So a supplemental dose of a hundred and twenty milligrams of hyaluronic acid per day is great for skin and aging. Number 10, ashwagandha. Ashwagandha online has a bad reputation for causing emotionless and apathy but it doesn't deny the fact that ashwagandha has research showing that it reduces stress, improves sleep and can increase testosterone levels. A 2021 meta analysis of clinical trials found that ashwagandha can alleviate anxiety and stress. However, the treatment dose, duration, and the type of extract varied a lot between the studies. Another 2021 meta analysis of five randomized control trials found that ashwagandha improved sleep in adults, but the effects were larger in people with insomnia. The dosage used was over six hundred milligrams per day. There are also many clinical trials showing ashwagandha improves testosterone and subjective sexual well-being in men. A 2021 review of clinical trials found that k s m sixty six ashwagandha at a dose of six hundred milligrams a day does improve testosterone by 15% in young men if used for eight weeks. And women without hormonal disturbances have also been seen to experience an improvement in their sexual health by taking three hundred milligrams of ashwagandha twice a day for eight weeks. So overall ashwagandha does have evidence for improving stress, sleep and hormone levels at a dose of around six hundred milligrams per day. Number 11 is Berberine which is a plant alkaloid that can improve your lipids and blood sugar. Berberine lowers serum lipids like triglycerides, cholesterol and apo b. It improves endothelial function which is the thin lining in blood vessels. It reduces the formation and migration of macrophages and vascular smooth muscle cells that start the accumulation of plaque in the arteries. Clinical trials show that berberine supplementation at doses of nine hundred to fifteen hundred milligrams a day lowers total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, and triglycerides compared to placebo or just lifestyle modifications. The meta analysis of clinical trials on berberine do find that berberine could reduce fasting blood glucose by about 14.8 to 15.5 milligrams per deciliter and hemoglobin a one c by 0.63 to 0.73%, which is significant. However, a 2021 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials concluded that berberine alone isn't superior to metformin in lowering blood sugar. Overall, berberine is great for lowering lipids, lowering blood sugar, and also waist circumference at a dose around a thousand milligrams per day. Number 12, garlic, which is another supplement great for improving lipids and other risk factors of cardiovascular disease. Garlic is a herbal food that's got antihypertensive, antiplatelet, anti diabetic, anti atherosclerotic and anti dyslipidemic effects as shown by mechanistic studies as well as human clinical trials. It's very versatile and it improves metabolic health and lipid metabolism. There are a few randomized controlled trials where aged garlic extract lowers coronary artery progression even when controlling for other variables. In a 2020 randomized controlled trial, aged garlic extract at a dose of twenty four hundred milligrams a day for one year stopped coronary artery classification progression, lowered inflammation, blood glucose, and blood pressure in patients at increased risk of cardiovascular events. But there's more. A 2019 double blind placebo controlled study on patients at high risk of cardiovascular disease showed that twenty four hundred milligrams of aged garlic extract a day increased microcirculation and triggered wound healing in the blood vessels, which protected against atherosclerosis progression and resulted in increased blood flow. So taking about twenty four hundred milligrams of aged garlic extract a day can be great for improving cardiovascular metabolic risk. Number 13 is magnesium which is one of the most important minerals in the body. Unfortunately, about fifty percent of people aren't getting enough magnesium. So if there's ever only a one supplement that you would take it would be magnesium. Low magnesium status worsens all the hallmarks of aging such as genomic instability, telomere shortening, epigenetic changes, loss of proteostasis, disabled autophagy, down regulation of nutrient sensing, mitochondrial dysfunction, cell senescence, stem cell exhaustion, chronic inflammation, and dysbiosis. What about the clinical trials? A 2022 meta analysis of 17 randomized controlled trials concluded that magnesium supplements decreased inflammation such as CRP. A 2024 meta analysis concluded that magnesium supplements decreased blood pressure especially at doses over four hundred milligrams a day. A 2020 meta analysis of clinical trials found that magnesium supplements decreased waist circumference in obese subjects with a BMI of over thirty. A 2016 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials saw that magnesium supplements improved insulin sensitivity and glucose control in both diabetic and non diabetic subjects. In type two diabetics, magnesium supplementation also lowers LDL cholesterol and increases HDL cholesterol at a dose of over three hundred milligrams. So as you can see, magnesium supplements work, and the effective dose can be as low as two hundred milligrams up to four hundred milligrams or above. Number 14 is melatonin, the sleep hormone. A 2021 review of 23 studies among people with sleep disorders found that melatonin decreased sleep disturbances while increasing total sleep time and quality. But melatonin is much more than that. Melatonin as a hormone is also one of the most powerful antioxidants your body has. Melatonin regulates gluethione, which is called the master antioxidant, but glutathione is actually controlled by melatonin, making it the true king of antioxidants. In fact, a 2020 meta analysis of clinical trials on melatonin at doses over ten milligrams a day have shown that it lowers inflammation, and a 2018 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that melatonin supplementation at a dose of over eight milligrams a day significantly reduced blood lipids like triglycerides and total cholesterol. So for sleep, a smaller dose of around zero point one to up to three milligrams of melatonin works. But for improving inflammation and lipids, you might need a dose of up to eight milligrams a day. The last supplement number 15 is vitamin k two. Vitamin k two has anti inflammatory and anti atherosclerotic properties. High dietary vitamin k two intake is associated with reduced coronary artery calcification. When it comes to supplements, then a 2023 study saw that vitamin k two supplementation at a dose of seven hundred and twenty micrograms a day combined with twenty five micrograms of vitamin d three resulted in a trend towards plaque regression in the arteries. The effects were more significant in patients with a calcium score of over 400. A 2023 meta analysis of 14 randomized control trials concluded at vitamin k supplementation could slow down coronary artery calcification. The studies used about one hundred to two thousand micrograms of vitamin k two m k seven. So this will be also an optimal supplemental dose. A 100 up to two thousand micrograms of vitamin k two m k seven. You don't have to start taking all of these supplements. But if you do, then rest assured that they actually work. Supplements are not the most important thing when it comes to health and longevity, but they can give you some advantages. If you want to know my full evidence based protocol for longevity, then check out this video. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click a like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is Sim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.