Does collagen really work for skin antiaging? A brand new 2025 meta analysis claimed that collagen supplements don't improve skin and it spread all over social media. People who were previously supporters of collagen now stop taking it. But here's the thing, that study has quite a lot of flaws that you need to be aware of. So in this video, I'm going to analyze this study deeply and tell you why I didn't stop taking collagen. The study was published in the American Journal of Medicine by the authors Myung and Park. They analyzed 23 randomized control trials on 1,474 participants. They found that in those 23 trials, collars and supplements significantly improved skin hydration, elasticity, and wrinkles. Great. That's what was shown by previous meta analysis already. However, when they did another analysis by funding source then only the studies funded by the supplement industry showed benefits. Their conclusion based on that was that there's no evidence that collagen supplements would have skin antiaging benefits. Now first of all, they did find that collagen supplements have skin antiaging benefits. They just decided that the studies that were funded by the supplement industry didn't count, which doesn't mean that collagen doesn't work. Now there are other major flaws with this analysis that I'm gonna share with you. Number one, industry funding doesn't immediately mean the results are wrong. The sponsors give research the money to do the research, but they don't have access to the data. And all of these studies are peer reviewed by third parties who have nothing to do with the company nor the researchers. You would have to examine each study individually and analyze if the study itself is high quality. Number two, this analysis didn't have large enough of a sample size for the non funded studies to claim that collagen doesn't work based on the non funded studies. Out of the 23 clinical trials that they were studied, the authors identified six studies that received no funding from supplement companies. However, that's not really the case. 21 of the 23 trials had some involvement with the supplement industry. Which means that the authors can't really claim that studies that have no ties to the supplement industry don't find benefits from collagen because their sample size was incredibly small. Two to six versus 17 to 21, depending on how you look at it. And if you look at all of the studies, then collagen supplements did provide significant benefits for skin and aging. Number three, when it comes to differentiating between high quality and low quality studies, then the authors of this analysis claim that if you looked at only high quality studies, then collagen had no benefits. However, to reach that conclusion, they had to exclude what they considered outlier studies. Outlier studies were high quality studies that showed a lot of benefits from collagen. If you did include these studies, collagen supplements did show an effect on wrinkles and skin antiaging. So it feels like they just excluded the studies to get the result that they wanted. One of these outlier studies was published in 2018, and it found that twelve weeks of supplementation with fish collagen peptides reduced skin roughness by 4%, increased skin moisture by 10.9%, and skin elasticity by 4.3%. The reason this study was removed was because it had results far better than the other trials they investigated. But this doesn't mean that it's necessarily wrong and these results actually weren't significantly better than other studies. We'll talk about that in a little bit. This study was funded by two private companies but the companies aren't the ones actually doing the research. They fund the researchers who do the research and the funders don't influence the study design, interpretation, analysis, or the results. The analysis was independently carried out by the clinical trial center of Eliade in South Korea where the study was conducted. The second outlier was a 2020 randomized controlled trial by Zmitek et al in Slovenia. They saw that four grams of fish collagen peptides with eighty milligrams of vitamin c at a for twelve weeks resulted in a significant reduction in wrinkles by 19.4% and an increase in dermis density by 16% compared to placebo. This particular study was high quality and it received funding from the European Union, the Slovenian government, and the Slovenian Research Agency. An additional funder was Valens International, which is a private company that provided the test products. But the study was also funded by the government organizations and the private company had no influence on the study design, analysis, or the results. These two studies were categorized as outlier studies because they had quite good results. But there's nothing in the design or the methodology of these studies that would indicate that they're bad studies or warrant the removal from the analysis. Let's also look at one of the lowest performing studies in the analysis that acts as a counterweight mitigating the total effect size of collagen on skin wrinkles. It's the Xiong et al 2023 study as you can see from this graph. However, the study by Xiong actually found that two grams of collagen peptides for twelve weeks resulted in 5% reduction in average skin roughness, 6% reduction in average max wrinkle height, and 13.7% reduction in eye wrinkle volume. While at the same time, the placebo group saw an increase in these markers. These results were all statistically significant. The reason this study was shown to be the worst performing study in this analysis was probably because they either averaged it all out into one single wrinkle marker such as wrinkle severity or roughness. They just looked at average skin roughness which improved by about 5%. Whereas other wrinkle metrics like wrinkle volume improved by nine to 14% which is not far behind the highest performing studies. These results would have greatly improved this study's statistical power in the analysis. But even outside of the analysis, if you look at the study itself alone, the collagen group saw significant reduction in wrinkles and improvement in skin elasticity, whereas these results got worse in the placebo group. So if I were to look at the worst performing study out of this meta analysis, then I would have to come to the conclusion that collagen peptides significantly reduce wrinkles compared to placebo, and this study was non sponsored. The average person reading this meta analysis or reading the social media headlines is gonna think that collagen supplements don't work. But as I've just shown you in this video, it's not that black and white. First of all, the analysis did find that collagen supplements reduce wrinkles. The majority of the studies found that effect. They just excluded the studies that had the biggest effects for whatever reason. And they didn't even research all of the studies on this topic as they only analyzed 23 studies. There's another twenty twenty three meta analysis of 26 clinical trials that showed collagen peptides have benefits on skin antiaging. Secondly, the worst performing study in this analysis, which was non funded, still found benefits on skin wrinkle reduction from collagen supplements. So the worst performing study even found that it does work. It just was nerfed in the statistical analysis which made the total results feel insignificant. But individually, this study did find significant reduction in skin wrinkles. Third, the supplement industry is obviously very sketchy mostly because supplements aren't regulated and you can't be sure what you're getting unless the company has third party testing for their ingredients. But it's important to realize that just because a study was funded by the supplement industry doesn't immediately mean that the study is bad or the results are invalid. Yes. You do need to take it with a grain of salt, but funding a study doesn't mean that you can influence the design, the methodology, or interpretation of the results. Those things are done by the researchers, and they're peer reviewed by third parties. It's actually quite a bad idea for supplement companies to fund research on specific non patentable supplement ingredients such as collagen. Let me explain. Let's say you're a company selling collagen and you fund research for collagen's effects on skin antiaging. You spend hundreds of thousands of dollars or up to millions of dollars in some cases to get the results. Let's say their results show that collagen does improve skin wrinkles. Then all of your competitors can use that same research to also promote their own collagen because nobody owns a patent for collagen. Nobody owns a patent for generic supplements like lysine, aaxanthin, omega threes, etcetera. Only if you have a specific formulation or a specific blend that's unique and not found in nature can you patent it. That's why big pharmaceutical companies don't do research on generic supplements. They can't patent it. They do research on their own patented drugs that their competitors can't sell. It doesn't make any business sense for a supplement company to fund their own research on generic supplements. You would only wanna do that for patentable ingredients and patentable drugs. When it comes to collagen, then 90% of the studies on collagen are done by the beauty and supplement industry. That's because no one else is interested in doing that research. Big pharma is not gonna do the research on collagen, so they do the research to see if it does work. Overall, as I said, I'm not stopping collagen peptides, I still take ten grams of hydrolyzed collagen peptides every day, mostly for the skin antigen benefits because your collagen starts decreasing already in your twenties. And if you bank up your collagen, you can reduce skin wrinkles later in life. If you want to know about the other supplements that are absolutely worth it, then check out my video where I rank a 100 supplements based on research from worst to best.