The best way to start improving the function of the mind is actually to dial in our physical health first. Starting with metabolic health, coming off sugars and ultra processed foods. Because of course, the quickest way to sometimes change the mind is to change the body. The thing that most adults need to do, once they've dialed in their physical health and, you know, you know, they're working out, they're sleeping well consistently most of the time, their energy's pretty good, etcetera. The most important thing adults can do to advance and go to the next level three point o is to ask themselves. Mark, welcome to the show. It's, a pleasure to be here with you, Sam, and, looking forward to our discussions. Yeah. I'm also excited to have you. And, yeah, we're gonna have a very nice discussion about how your physical health and mental health are so intertwined, and you can't really have one without the other. And for your, like, optimal health, you really need to have your, like, mental health and physical health both in check. So, yeah, you're kind of one of the best experts to discuss this with, and, yeah, we'll have a good discussion. Maybe we can start with, you know, you giving a short backstory about Sure. Who you are and, yeah, how did you get into health? Yeah. For sure. Well, I I think I'm one of the luckiest people alive because I get to teach about health all the time. And, and it is such a profound and important subject that I took a deep interest in just when I took the decision to become a medical doctor. I saw the health challenges of the people around me and really figured out I do not wanna go down that route and, became deeply interested in health when I was a teenager. Particularly got into meditation. So very early on, started to really understand how important it was that my mind was trained, really took an interest in nutrition. Went to med school, of course, learned nothing about those things in med school. And, and about halfway through my med school, I went to Saint Mary's in Pangto, London. Whilst I was loving it, I I came to the conclusion that if I really wanna learn about health, I need to look outside of allopathic medicine to see what other systems are teaching about health. And so I actually, studied about Ayurvedic medicine, Tibetan medicine, traditional Chinese medicine to better understand a more holistic understanding of what health is about. So when I was at med school, it was pretty inevitable at some stage I would move beyond allopathic medicine. And so after a couple of years of graduating, I started working as a integrative medicine doctor here in The UK, and I've been doing that for about twenty years. I was one of the original cofounders of Europe's first professional training program in integrated medicine for health care professionals. And particularly early back in the day, I was doing a lot of media focused work. So I was on TV talking about the holistic approach to health. And my first book was the mind body bible, and it really deep dive into, listen, we have a mind. Most people's mind works against us and not for us. Same for our body. What is the connection between the two and how can we take care of both and balance so that they are aligned and that they allow us to live a deeply fulfilling life. So that that's my kinda background. And then thereafter, I really went down the personal development route. I had my own mental health struggles that I that had a profound shaping influence, on my understanding of what mental health is. And really to understand it, you have to go into emotional health and relational health. And then I had, a whole bunch of time alongside Dave Asprey working with him at Bulletproof. So really got to understand, the biohacking world. So I've really emerged from that with a big picture, integral understanding of optimal health. I've got a framework, and my thing now is just to tell the world about it to anyone who's interested in hearing about it. Yeah. So you have, like, a, like, a doctor strange story that you were a a doctor, and then you travelled to the Eastern philosophy and Eastern medicine side and, emerged as a, you know, kind of a practitioner of, both both sides of the world. Yes. Yeah. My my first deep dive was actually into energy medicine and and sensing and working with the subtle energies of the body. And and, you know, when you train your nervous system to kind of perceive them, then they become apparent. And then you realize that the core aspect of health is the continuous flow of life force energy through your system. And that needs to happen at multiple levels, your metabolic, biological level, but also your psychological level and also the life force level. So, yeah, you know, a lot of what I teach is kinda grounded in my personal experience and just my deep exploration of really what health is all about. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. Like the metabolism, it's essentially, like, just energy production. And and without without metabolism, then, yeah, you're not alive. It's all over. Yeah. Yeah. I I have, like, a more, like, a meta level question, which is maybe, like, a good introduction to our discussion. So, like, you mentioned, yeah, like the body mind connection, and this is obviously one of the oldest questions that, you know, philosophers and, everyone has been thinking about, like, what is the mind and how does it relate to the body? It's like this Cartesian dualism, like, are the body and mind separate, or are they connected? So what what is your opinion on that? Yeah. Well, this is something that I've been, teaching on and exploring for twenty years. So do you have a perspective on it? And really, they are aspects of a whole system. Right? And so I sometimes think it's better to talk about the mind body system. Right? But they have different functions. So the body is really the externalized aspect of the mind that provides a vehicle for us to explore and navigate life here on planet Earth. The mind is the mechanism that allows us to experience, make decisions, respond to, challenges here on planet Earth. So there's one whole system that has multiple functions, but they work as a coherent whole. And where we wanna get to is that we the challenge for most people is they don't know how to use their mind skillfully nor develop it. Right? But what you come to appreciate, and you'll know this, of course, is that the best way to start improving the function of the mind is actually to dial in our physical health first, starting with metabolic health, coming off sugars and ultra processed foods. Because, of course, the quickest way to sometimes change the mind is to change the body. And then when the body and physical health function changes, so the mind and our inner experience, our mood also shifts as well. So we wanna be working with both dimensions simultaneously. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices, which are the bond charge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes, they do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin anti aging, hormone optimization, pain management and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes. Especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the bond charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most rhella turbidizers don't have the right wavelengths of light which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Boncharge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research, and they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code seam, s I I m, for a 15% discount. I I think the best example is that if someone is super stressed or, or, yeah, like, there's something in the nervous system that is keeping them in this sympathetic state where they're like this fight or flight and stressed out, then, everyone kind of retrospectively says that I don't know what took over me. I was, like, very explosive or impulsive. I was angry towards my family or friends. But it's, yeah, like, you're in this sympathetic state that is then controlling your mind or directing your behavior in some way. And if you get out of that when you're, like, relaxed, then you're like, Yeah. Something else, or you you return to being, like, quote, unquote normal. But, yeah. Yes. Your your your nervous system actually dictated your view or perception of the world and how you behaved. It did. And and this is a really important point because most people's sense of self is a reflection of a highly stressed state of consciousness that actually gives rise to the experience of them being a very thought based separate sense of self. Whereas, actually, once your nervous system is regulated and calm and balanced and you access what we would call a state of presence, So it means actually your psychological center of gravity is in your lower belly. And anyone who does martial arts knows that's where you wanna be grounded because that's your natural center of gravity. Then the mind becomes still. You become naturally more present and attuned, and you have a deeper sense that this is more me Mhmm. Versus the kind of somewhat stressed, distracted neurotic self. And most adults live in a hyper stress, hyperactivated state most of the time. There's kind of we call it surviving, not thriving. And really the work I've done with now thousands of people over the years, both patients and both kind of students who who come through my training programs, is teaching them that really beyond the kind of thought based sense of self, who's highly distracted and often filled full of problems and worries is a deeper sense of self that feels intrinsically connected and whole and present and appreciative. And that so many of the qualities we're trying to get in life, inner peace, well-being, joy, love, and connection, are qualities of this. We call it the deep self. And so an integral part of the journey of health is learning how to access this both as a resource, but also as a source of wisdom. And so the whole model I built out is really fundamentally grounded in what I call fundamental well-being, Where regardless of your situation, you're able to access a sense of inner peace and ease and resourcefulness in order to better respond to what's going, in your life at that time. So so that that's the kind of big picture model, and you really need to be working with all these dimensions. The problem is most people don't know how to do it. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. It's like, you know, when we describe what is, like, our true self or deep self, then it's not then it's never, yeah, like, the the flight or flight and the stressed out self or the, the neurotic or the kind of angry self that is controlled by this more, like, the primal instincts and, yeah, like, some sort of distress. Like, if you ever, like, ask, okay. Describe yourself, what's your true self? Then it's always like this in the parasympathetic kind of I mean, right. More relaxed and, when you feel like your true self. And, yeah, when you're imbalanced in the sympathetic state, then you're like some something is to taking over my true self and I'm in this I'm in this distressed ego state or, That's right. Yeah, defensive state. So, yeah, the Yeah. Getting access to this parasympathetic true self is when you actually be able to, you know, live the most fulfilling and, meaningful life for you and for your goals, whatever they are. Yes. And the most important hack to do that is to cue internal safety. So in 2016, a new theory of stress emerged that really has kinda helped evolve and refine their understanding of stress. And what is now believed is that, actually, stress is our default state because it has a survival advantage. It keeps us very alert to changes in our environments. And so that's our default state. And that kinda makes sense. Most people are stressed most of the time. But what turns the stress signals off? It's the internal experience of safety. And so there's some and we can touch on this, how to create that. When our nervous system neurocept safety, it activates the ventral vagal branch of the parasympathetic nervous system, and it moves us into what would be called grounded, attuned presence in which we feel connected to ourself and to life and to the people in front of us. But we have to know how to bring internal safety, and there's a couple of mind hacks for doing that. Mhmm. So, yeah, like, how do people then get out of this constant stress state for them to, like, start unlocking their potential and, start getting, like, healthy? That's it. So, the way I teach it is we wanna get into the habit of welcoming internally whatever shows up. And what that means is, you and I, we are the custodians of our inner experience. When we are awake, we have an inner experience. There's always emotions there. There's bodily sensations. There's stuff going on. When we habitually welcome that, we welcome the actuality of its presence, that actually signals the presence of safety to our nervous system. And there's two ways of doing it. And this is really one of the first things that I learned way back, which is, when you have an uncomfortable emotion inside of you, whether it's stress, agitation, fear, whatever it may be, the first thing you do is, in the moment of noticing it, you say to it silently three times, welcome. Welcome. Welcome. Now, anyone listening to this, if they tried that now, what they would notice is when they say those three words, they will shift into the parasympathetic nervous system. They will naturally breathe more fully and deeply, and they'll experience a greater sense of calm despite the presence of the agitation or fear. So that that's kinda like level one. So get into the habit of welcoming whatever shows up. And the reason we do that is, as adults, we kind of emerge into adulthood with a very constricted bandwidth of allowable emotional experience. Some of us will only do stress and anxiety and worry. Right? They're really good at doing anxiety, but they haven't yet opened up their experience to joy or gratitude or love. Others, well, they're full of positivity and joy, but they haven't opened their bandwidth up to grief or anger or shame. And where we wanna get to, if self actualization is important to us, fulfilling our lived potential, is to open up the bandwidth of allowable experience to welcome all unconditioning. Doesn't mean we we want it to be there. Doesn't mean we like it. It's just what's required in order to evolve as a human being. It has to be in the presence of neurological safety. So that's the practice of inner welcoming. And and the easiest way to continue that practice throughout the day, and again, your, listeners can do this as I'm sharing this, is to have an inner smile. Okay? And, again, this was a Taoist practice that was taught to me, and it goes like this. You allow your eyes to be soft. So you got soft eyes. We know that when we soften our visual gaze, it activates the body's relaxation system. Then the next step is you allow your tongue to be soft. If you have your mouth open slightly, tongue soft, what it does, it stops subvocalization, which is internal mental chatter. Then, soft eyes, soft tongue, you center yourself in the center of your heart, and you allow an inner smile to expand from there, even if you don't feel like smiling. It's a trainable skill. And what can happen just normally after a couple of days of doing this is you can instantly access an inner smile, and you will get a sense of it filling you. Because that's how we know when we're being welcomed by another human being. They smile at us. Right? And it's sincere, and it's kinda natural, and it's genuine. When we bring the same to our own inner experience, that shifts us out of stress. It shifts us into connection. And from there, we are so much more embodied and present. So my first teaching is always always be welcoming to your internal experience. See, a lot of people are fighting their their experience, dishing their experience that they've got strong in the critic by criticizing their experience. I want it to be this. I don't want it to be this. They're in this constant state of resistance to what is. When you shift into nonresistance and welcome it, it changes everything. Yeah. Like, not being, distraught by it, but just observing and accepting it. Yeah. You're welcome. Yeah. And and here's the thing. A lot of our psychological suffering is from resisting the fact is that well, the reality is it is there. Right? So you might as well turn towards it, acknowledge it, and welcome it. And then from that welcoming place, then you do a process of inquiry. Mhmm. What, if anything, do I need to do to take care of myself? Right? And then that's when we kinda go into more root cause based health care. Right? So it's like, I'm habitually anxious all the time. So I turn towards it. I bring safety to it. What, if anything, do I need to take care of myself? You see, anxiety is just the felt experience of the body's alarm going off. Right? Mhmm. That's all it is. It's just the alarm going off. It's a feedback system. You know, symptoms are not the problem. They're the feedback of the system. And so then we do an inquiry. And for and for some people with anxiety, they're they're super anxious because there's trauma setting in their nervous system that needs to be processed and deactivated. Others, they're super anxious because the thyroid hormones are too high. Well, they're over caffeinated. Right? Or they're overwhelmed and stressed by, you know, the number of things on the plate. So so you turn towards you face it, you welcome it, and then you inquire, what do I need to do to take care of myself? If I do not have the answers, I find someone that I trust to support me with that. What if someone is so, like, you know, these type of things require a certain level of this self awareness Correct. In the moment. And, usually, if you are in that more stressed out state, then it's hard to find that self awareness. Yeah. Are there any, like, direct ways to, like, stimulate the vagus nerve or some ways to, yeah, make a parasympathetic shift, like Yeah. More more physically, like, without the mental technique? Yeah. I I think the easiest way is just to, soften your gaze, and tune into the spaciousness all around you. So what happens when we're in a stress state, we go into a locked in, zoomed in state. Mhmm. We go into what's called the portrait mode. And people will notice that next time you're stressed, notice what's happened to your gaze, and you'll be zoomed in, locked in, either on something in front of you or a thought of the story in your head. And then the moment you see that, kind of smile on the inside, soften your gaze, and without thinking, notice your periphery in your gaze. Mhmm. And then what will happen is you'll breathe naturally more deeply, and you've shifted state. So that that really is really straightforward. The other one is those fantastic breath work techniques. The one that I've been teaching for such a long time is four seven breathing. So we know when we prolong the expiration, it activates the relaxation response. So it looks like this. Okay. I'm stressed out. I'm feeling disconnected. I breathe into the count of four, preferably through the nose, but it doesn't matter too much, but out to the count of seven, so prolonged expiration. And I repeat that a couple of times. And, again, that would just shift you into a more balanced, relaxed kind of present state. So our breath and our visual system are the immediately applicable ways to shift our state. And, of course, there's loads of others, like relaxing your posture, looking up slightly. Normally, when we're very stressed, we tend to look down. Even if you just kinda naturally tilt your head upwards a little bit or even look up to the ceiling, it can really shift your perspective and your mood. So there's all these kind of so that's why we kinda say the direct way to change the mind is through the body because the body is the externalised expression of the mind. So it kinda when you understand that, it all kinda makes sense. Mhmm. Right. What what about, like, less of these acute stressors? So there's obviously things like more chronic low grade stressors, like gut problems, some autoimmune response, house molds, environmental things, nutrient deficiencies, like, all those things can also, let's say, keep you in a, like, this subconsciously stressed out state and prevent you from, you know, enjoying life to the fullest. So how That's right. How do you go about, like, addressing it? Or as a doctor, like, okay. What kind of diagnostics? Or let's say some person comes into your practice and they have those kind of low grade potential issues, how do you go about solving them? Yeah. Well, firstly, I think it's fantastic when anyone shows up and is willing to get some help and perspective on what to do because the golden rule is wherever possible, don't do it by yourself. Mhmm. Because we all have our blind spots and we don't have the knowledge and stuff. So that's kind of one of the blessings of integrative health care, functional medicine. You know? So ideally find someone that you like and respect who has that training and that kind of functional root cause kind of model. It really starts with, you know, comprehensive, inquiry, consultation, assessment, the whole system assessment. So systematically going through the different biological systems, getting a sense, of course, where the greatest imbalances are, but also appreciating there's really a hierarchy of importance. And it tends to be, for most people, nutrition and gut is where you start. And you just systematically start going through the systems, starting with nutrition and gut, to kinda clean them up. And, you know, way back in the day, like twenty years ago, you know, I used to work with a lot of people with depression and anxiety. And the first thing I would do is just bring them off, added sugars. Right? And, you know, we'd have to hydrate them and prepare them for the challenge of the first couple of days. But so many people felt so much better, right, when they went on added sugars and cakes and cookies and all the kind of all that kind of awful stuff. Just like, oh my gosh. I feel like a completely different human being. Right. Because you just reduce inflammation in your body. Your blood sugar's all over the place anymore. So sometimes it can be very simple into, interventions that make a difference. But sometimes, of course, it's not simple. Right? And then you've gotta do, you know, a whole bunch of bloods, to acetate and see what the inflammatory markers are, the lipoproteins, look at the hormones. But sometimes it depends on the people's budget. Right? So, you know, these things can be pretty affordable. So it depends on and also it depends on how committed they are to implementing the necessary changes, how motivated they are. One of the reasons I love working with the kind of buy hacking groupers and the audience itself is is great for me because they're super motivated. Right? They're curious. They're kind of up for it. They're engaged. That's fantastic. So it's a systematic approach through the biological systems while simultaneously, is this person stuck in a stress state? And what can we do to just give them some foundational practices to start addressing this stress at the same time? Because we know someone's stress is gonna put their sleep out of whack. They're much more likely to self medicate with sugar and alcohol and and distraction, all that kind of stuff. So you that's why mind and body in parallel is is kinda real key. Mhmm. Yeah. I would imagine, like, things like inflammatory markers and, maybe blood sugar markers and thyroid markers are, like, the biggest ones that affect your mood and, like, mental well-being other like any anything else that you think would be most Yeah. You know, kinda b twelve, vitamin d, and, obviously, kind of really important. But I would say for a lot of people with kind of mental health issues, it's the hormones that that they're really, kinda key to have a good understanding of. And, of course, you know, particularly in in females, if the if the iron levels are low, that's gonna have a profound influence both on their energy and the mood as well. So that is why in in my books at least, you know, we should all be doing a comprehensive panel of bloods probably once a year. And if there's any significant health issues there, then twice a year. The challenge for most people is if they go to their general practitioner, their primary health care practitioner, and they do a limited panel of bloods, and then they come back and they do the worst thing, which is if they say, there's nothing wrong with you Mhmm. Because the bloods are fine. And, of course, as you know, it's like, well, hold it a sec. You're looking it through the filter of normal versus optimal. And two is, that's just a snapshot in time of a very restricted panel. What about the things you didn't test for? Right? So, you know, the the beauty of functional medicine is it's just it's a it's a it's a commitment to getting to the heart of what the core drivers are. But typically, when you reduce inflammation, you clean up the diet, you dial in the sleep, of course, you start exercising consciously, you balance the hormones, you know, you restore good gut health, then fortunately for us, the body tends to kinda start taking care of itself, particularly if we're dealing with stress. And particularly if we start, building in more joy and happiness into our life. Right? So we know that happy, fulfilled people tend to naturally take better care of their body. Right? And they fill their kind of body full of positive hormones and neurotransmitters. And so it's very important, particularly if anyone's listening to this and they tend to over focus on the physical to balance it up with, we always wanna be working on our happiness, our joy, our relationships, you know, the, our fulfillment because they're equally important. Yeah. It's like often especially, like, people who are super motivated and super enthusiastic about their health, They might, yeah, like, focus only on on the physical health that I need to do these, you know, interventions and exercises, etcetera, but they don't really, let's say or, like, you know, sometimes, like, their relationships or their mental health can, suffer. Like, they might grind through Right. Just the physical, like, the workouts and those things. But, yeah, like, ideally, in, the, you know, the actual health is when you have both things imbalanced. It's not like being super fit and super physically healthy and having poor mental health and poor relationships. Right. Having both kind of equal equally elevated. And, like, vice versa, you know, you can if you have a perfect mental health and perfect mood and family relationships, etcetera, but your physical health is kinda bad, you're overweight and, that Exactly. Then it's not not the perfect either. So you need to have both elevated Yeah. To be optimally healthy holistically. Yeah. Agreed. And and you've just kinda nicely described what I call biohacking two point o and three point o. Two point o really is a focus on, the body and brain. It's mainly physical and cognitive health orientated. That's where most people start because in a way, it's a bit easier because it's all externalized and you're looking at, you know, what can I take to help myself? You know, what tech can I use to help myself? And that really is I see the foundations of health. But then what are you gonna do with that energy, and and that vitality? And that's where three point o is because now it's saying, well, equally important is learning how to upgrade the operating system of your mind so you can use your mind more skillfully, work with your emotions more intelligently and consciously. Because you can only be conscious in relationships if you have a healthy relationship to your own emotions, because emotions are the bridge to in relationships. And so what I see for a lot of people is is that they can overfocus on the body at the expense of their emotional, relational, and mental health. Right? But you also make a good point. You can have some very conscious, mature, enlightened beings who are spiritually aware and all that kind of stuff, but they got prediabetes. Right? You know, they're kinda metabolically unhealthy and the waistline is too much and the blood pressure is up. So they're equally in balance. Right? Because they undervalue the body. Right? And so we want to equally value the body and mind because the two aspects of the whole. We wanna be simultaneously working with it. And to be honest with you, the most important, I believe, the thing that most adults need to do, once they've dialed in their physical health and, you know, you know, they're working out, they're sleeping well consistently most of the time, their energy's pretty good, etcetera, the most important thing adults can do to advance and go to the next level, three point o, is to ask themselves, where are my challenges and struggles? What am I not facing? And then when you acknowledge, and you gotta be honest about it, where your difficulty is. And for a lot of people, it tends to be around addictions and compulsions or certain behaviors that crop up in relationships. Right? That's where the work is. Right? And there's a beautiful phrase that says, whatever is in the way is the way. And so it requires us to get humble and honest with ourselves, to get the necessary help and support, to navigate our greatest challenges. And it's easy to do. You just look around the dimensions of your life, and you say, where am I out of integrity? Where am I struggling? What is not going well? What part of my behavior is limiting or dysfunctional or unhealthy? Right? Mhmm. And that is where you wanna deploy the energy and the focus you've got from looking after your body to work through that, typically with the help of a guide, support, mentor, therapist, whatever it might be. And then when you start working through what I call your shadow, all the parts of your behavior in your life that you kinda don't want to acknowledge and speak about, that's when you start to mature and develop and transform as a human being. And that takes you into the realm of biohacking three point o. And when you're there, then there's a lot more depth. You're kind of as interested in your emotional world, your relational world, and the transpersonal dimensions of life as you are the physical, but the held imbalance. Yeah. I often feel that if people are, like, solely focused on, like, the physical health side of things, then, it's often because they're afraid of not being this optimal. They're afraid a lot of, like, diet diets tend to have that, like, I need to eat this perfect diet according to my diet principles, and, I can't never, like, fall off the wagon or do something else because of usually, it's because of fear of some, scarcity or some, yeah, like, fear of, like, whatever nutrient or whatever food ingredient that may be. But in some cases, the best thing for your, you know, mental health as well is to not care about the optimal diet and to Yes. You know, you know, eat, like, the birthday cake or whatever the case may be. That's right. Because it's usually, like, a fear of that if I fall off the wagon, then I'm not able to fall back I'm not able to go back on the right track, and therefore, it's like this scarcity mindset. I need to be on this perfect health routine all the time because if I accidentally fall off it, then I'll, like, you know, not get back on it and not get my health right on my life. Exactly. So it's kind of the scarcity of the mindset. Whereas if you are confident in your ability to, you know, go go back on the right track Yeah. The right, like, discipline and self control, even if you fall off the wagon every once or deliberately go off off the wagon, then it's more of, like, yeah, mature and abundant mindset so that you know that you can, you can do it and then you know you'll be able to go back on the right track. Got it. And one of the hallmarks of a functional, healthy mind is that it's self reflective, and it's flexible and adaptable. Mhmm. Right? So there's new ones. Right. Which is there are situations in which I'm gonna not obsess and worry about my diet because, you know, a couple of days from now, I'll get back on track. That's not a problem. It doesn't cause me undue stress around it. When the mind tips into rigidity and control, that is actually feedback from the mind that is actually operating dysfunctionally. Right? So we are supposed to have a flexible, adaptable mind grounded in our guiding principles and our values, and we kinda live from there. And the real question is, is my, extra obsession around this the body and the diet, is it detracting from the equally important other dimensions of health? Right? And if someone lives in their head all the time, and places their body and their diet at the center of their universe, that's just feedback that because what should be the center of our universe is the whole of life. It's the whole of life experience. We want life at the center, not our body. And others, they have the mind at the center. Right? So so they they all they do is they're very intellectual and everything is about their thinking and the stories they create around it. We're like, no. You want life at the center of your life. Okay? It's the whole. And the key for us is where am I out of integrity? Where am I out of imbalance? What am I not facing? And when I look at the whole of my life, where am I not thriving and flourishing? Right? So physically, I may be performing really well. Fantastic. But I can almost guarantee there's gonna be other aspects of your life you ain't thriving, my friend. And it could be in your relationships. It could be in your fulfillment. It could be in your financials. And and what we want to get to a place is with time, and it does take time and it takes patience, is that you get to a place where the majority of the aspects of who you are and your life are in harmony. And the way you know they're in harmony is because majority of the time, there's an inner sense of well-being and ease, and a sense of flow, and connection and wholeness. And that is just feedback. You're kind of you've been through this process of cleaning up. What you're doing is you're cleaning up the consequences of past experiences and past decisions. And so when you look at the whole of your life, it's in a good place. And that's kinda where we want to get to. And then it's kinda maintenance. We're still continuing to grow and learn. And, most biohackers for sure and health optimizers, what's great about them is they have a curious mindset. Right? They just want to learn. And that being, keeping close to curiosity and learning is great, but we wanna be equally living. We wanna be living life in alignment with our inner purpose. And we all have a unique purpose. Right? And normally it's built on the whole of our life's experience. It's like, how can we uniquely show up in a way that's authentic and kinda serve the web of life? Right? We're all connected, and our job is to work through our stuff, to clean out the conditioning and the distortions so that we can show up in integrity, having taken good care of ourselves, to be a positive presence in the world, whatever that looks like. Gotcha. Yeah. That's absolutely true. One thing also, like, causes a lot of, I guess, fear and anxiety for people is getting bad results in their, like, blood work or tests. So, how would you how can people, yeah, like, approach this? Like, they get, like, some blood test. It's, you know, usually, it's not even, like, something super serious. They don't get diagnosed with a particular disease, but even then, like, they might be something is off the ranges, and a lot of people might be, I guess, worried about that. So what's, like, a good mental model to, like, approach that kind of a situation? Yeah. Well, you can approach it cognitively, which is to reframe it, but that doesn't tend to kinda work so much. Right? Because our emotional reality trumps our best thinking. So what tends to happen when people get particularly anxious or tense around the result, I think the first thing is, to ideally partner with someone, whether it's a functional trained practitioner, whatever, who can contextualize the result. And as you know, you know, sometimes the blood test results we get are a function of the time of day. Right? And if it's, you know, there's a parameter that's significantly off that's unexpected, first thing you wanna do is probably retest it. Right? So that's the thing. Is it accurate? Is it true? You know? Was it a fingerprint prick test? Was it a venous scanner sample test? So there's all these different things. So there's the accuracy of the testing. And then there's having someone alongside of you who can contextualize it, and then come up with a strategy to actually okay. Given this, how does this fit into the big picture of what you're struggling with and your symptoms? What information is giving this, and what will our next practical step be? The challenge for a lot of people is when they're trying to figure it out themselves. Right? And it's very easy when we're stressed. Well, it's really hard when you're stressed to think clearly and have perspective. So that is why I I believe we all need mentors, coaches, therapists, practitioners, basically a team of people around us because we're not designed to figure out life in isolation. We need each other. So I think for a lot of people is, like, you've gotta build consciously build out your team to support you. So it's not your problem. It's the team's issue to figure out, and it just takes the pressure off us. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. I guess it's, yeah, important to realize that tests can be, sometimes false positives or, like, more like yeah. They fluctuate cause a lot, especially Oh, it does. Blood markers. So even though you might have something off the range, then it doesn't mean that something is kind of immediately wrong. And I guess then it highlights the importance of, like, more frequent testing, to you because because of the fluctuations. So, you know, if, yeah, some single marker or a few markers are off, then just test them again in a few weeks and might be already, like, improved and the better. Ex exactly. And I think there's also when people self interpret blood tests, what I see is because they're not necessarily trained in their interpretation Mhmm. They can miss the really important information because they're kinda pulled up into some parameter that is not so kinda relevant. Right? So I had a case recently of someone's asking for perspective advice on interpreting the bloods. They'd gone through, like, a longevity blood panel, like, you know, more testing than I've seen in many, many years. And the longevity doctor had gone through it manually highlighted this and that, and it was just a disaster to read. I mean, it was just so confusing. And and the and the conclusions that came out of it, I thought, oh my gosh. How did they come to that conclusion? What I see is completely different. The thing that jumped out for this person was their lipoprotein a is really high. So they're at a significantly high risk of a cardiovascular event, and that wasn't even flagged up. Mhmm. Right? And then turns out his, brother, his father all had significant cardiac events early on in life. Right? So so they were pursuing these vague parameters, you know, kind of correlates of growth hormone, and we're looking at potentially growth hormone injections every day, and that was the path it was going. I looked and said, my friend is like, this is all about your heart. Right? We've gotta check out the other lipoproteins here because that's where the focus should be. Right? And that the growth hormone that did IGF one, that can fluctuate. You're still within the normal range for your age. So if that was something you really wanna pursue, well, we need to repeat it again because it can just fluctuate at the time of day. So it's sometimes very easy, and some practitioners are guilty of perpetuating this, of pursuing the wrong thing or decontextualizing the information so you're going down a blind alleyway, and we don't wanna be doing that. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. Depends, yeah, like, what the goals are. Like, if your goal is, like, body composition or, like, some quality of life or energy levels, then, yeah, maybe growth hormone is something to focus on. But, yeah, like, the bigger bigger fish fish to fries and, obviously, hobbies for your actual longevity. So yeah. Yeah. Yeah. A a phrase that I I picked up from Dave because we hung out so much was he uses the word kryptonite. You can say, what's your kryptonite? What are what are the things happening within you and around you that are undermining your health? What are the big rocks? Right? And sometimes we can dive into the minutiae and miss the big rocks that are in front of us. So my kind of philosophy is, like, figure out what the big rocks are first, address the big rocks, and guess what the minute she or often not will take care of itself. Yeah. You mentioned, the biohacking three point o. So, like, incorporating, like, the whole of the body and the mind. So, you also have, like, a video webinar about this kind of a concept. So maybe you can share share that. Yeah. No. Of course. So, really, this is, I guess, the emergence and consolidation of my my lifetime's work, to date on on what is required to be a healthy, high functioning, fulfilled human being. And so it emerges from my deep dive into integrated medicine, functional medicine, biohacking, and human development. So I tend to see things through a human development kind of framework. So we've put together this, webinar at the School of Biohacking that I'm cofounder of. It's called Thrive Essentials, free to access, where I'm presenting this biohacking three point o model and talking through what I call the five pillars of human thriving. So we've got the kind of biohacking two point o, which looks after self care and self optimization. Then the three point o is the other three pillars, which is focused on self mastery, self actualization, and self transcendence. So I'm mapping out the pillars. Then I'm kinda giving what I would call just the essentials that every human being needs to know about how to improve the function of your body, mind, and emotions. It's just, you know, if if I had one wish, it would be every human being in the planet would see this free master class because it just gives you the foundations. And then after that, we had then have Thrive Unlimited, which is a guided thirty five day protocol that I guide people through where we deep dive into each of these five pillars as a whole. And then after that, we have the world's first biohacking instructor training program, which I'm super, super excited about. So it's for biohacking enthusiasts who want to deep dive into biohacking, but as importantly, come out of it with a way for them to monetize their passion for biohacking because I'm gonna be teaching how to create personalized programs for clients around nine specific outcomes and domains that I believe biohackers are particularly uniquely suited to you to look at. So that's the school of biohacking. Yeah. So like instructor program, not, obviously, you'll learn about your own health as well, but it's more of teaching others and becoming instructor. Yeah. Right. And staying out of the train of functional medicine and doctoring, that's right. That that's their thing. This is very clear boundaries. It's like you're gonna learn how to create personalized programs around energy, sleep optimization, cognitive performance. You know, your expertise, health, your longevity, you're gonna be a contributor, which is fantastic. Consciousness, hacking, body composition. So it's for me, I feel it's the sweet spot for biohackers. So we're gonna and the key for biohacking, as you know, is is about personalization. There's core guiding principles that apply to the majority, but then it's gotta be personalized. Mhmm. What are some of, like, the core pillars or the, like, fundamentals of this, thriving as a human being? Like, we don't have to go into, like, all the details about, like Sure. You know, is it, like, relationships? Is it sleep? Or is it nutrition? Yeah. I would say it really starts with self care. And and self care, in my experience, tends to be missed by some biohackers. They jump into optimization before the foundation self. And self care is, meeting the physical and psychological needs of your mind body system imbalance every day. Okay? So that's just kinda simple things that, of course, good nutrition and sleep and movement and exercise, all of the usual stuff, supplementation, of course, all of that. But then sorts of things like personal hygiene, dental hygiene, visiting the dentist, you know, kind of health screening, that kind of stuff. But then equally important is our psychological needs. Right? So there are certain needs we all need in order to be happy, healthy, and not so stressed. And so they are the needs for, positive attention, privacy. We need to be able to step away from the busyness of life and reflect on where we're at. We need meaning and significance and purpose. So it means that when we look to the week ahead, we if there is no sense of excitement and meaning about it, we have to make that happen. Right? And we need community and connection. We need significance. We need to be stretched and challenged. So it's really kinda grounded in soccer. We really want those in place. And then on top of that, then we do the optimization piece, which is how do we now dial it in so that we can really optimize the function of our body and brain system. Right? And so that can be, you know, more advanced nutritional supplementation. That can be bringing technologies to bring in efficiencies into our optimization process. So those are the foundations. But the real key and, I I feel where most biohackers will appreciate it most is learning how to skillfully work with your nervous system and mind and emotions. When you dial that in, and you don't have to be meditating a lot every day, but it's more about using it throughout the day, that's the game changer. And then we deep dive into self transcendence. So I'm gonna be sharing the work of the Center for the Study of Non Symbolic Consciousness who pioneered the work on fundamental well-being, which is how we can, through our internal mind training process, access our deeper nature beyond the everyday mental based sense of self, which innate to it has the well-being and wholeness we seek. And there's some incredible techniques and hacks for accessing that, so we covered that as well. And then there's self actualization, which is working through our shadow, all the things that we're not yet attending to about ourself and our life, because built into the shadow are gifts. And when those gifts are reclaimed, they become available to us so that we can do our best work in the world. So that that's the kind of guiding principles of it. Yeah. And what is there any, like, if you had to choose, like, one single thing to do to achieve that, what would it be? I think it would be a couple of things. Mindset would be really important, and I think the first thing is to have a sincere desire to know the truth. And that means the truth of what is true. What is true about who I am as a human being? What is true about what's going inside my body? What is true about how I'm being out of integrity? What is true about the help that I need in order to progress as human beings? So I think staying close to that is like keeping keeping curious on what is true. And the challenge for people moving from two point o to three point o, two point o requires a lot of control. Right? So really two point o is I'm taking personal responsibility for my health, my well-being, and my life. Awesome. That's fantastic. But some people can use way too much control, so they're grasping, they're efforting, they're getting caught. They do in a very tense way. In order to move to three point o, we have to shift gears. We have to soften and move into active surrender. And active surrender is I'm willing to do whatever's required to do the inner work, to take care of myself, while simultaneously letting go and softening and opening and receiving. Because what we eventually realize as we develop and unfold our potential is we are not isolated separate beings. We are one whole co arising together. And you can feel into that and experience it as a tangible sense of life as a whole. And when you do that, we become a lot more humble, and we start to figure out, boy, sometimes when I stop trying to figure everything out and instead deeply listen and observe with an open curiosity and some humility, the answers and the guidance arrive. So we move from, being very head based and cognitive to more a balanced place where we balance intuition with a willingness to learn, with a receptivity, and admit to ourselves that it's okay not to know. In two point o, it's all about knowing. Right? It's accumulating of knowledge and ideas, and this is who I am, and control in three point o, which tends to the transition tends to kick in in the mid thirties, early forties, we start to realize that, actually, I can't always know, and that's okay. I can just do what I do. And then we kinda soften. And as we soften, we tend to get more real, more human, and then we soften into the emotional domains and our relational domains. And then if we do the work to clean that up, the pathways up, then we experience a whole another level of joy and well-being. And it's just and then then you're living life at a whole another level. It's a developmental pathway. We pretty much always go through it. But if people aren't willing to give up control, they will never know three point o, and that is where their potential is. So, you know, the kind of framework I I teach really starts with it starts with your mindset and a willingness to know what is true. Mhmm. Mhmm. Yeah. I think that's amazing to wrap up. That's a good point to wrap it up as well. And, yeah, it's something that is like a lifelong process and, people, you know, that you're never, like, really fully there. It's a continuous process of Always. Growing. That's right. You got it. But, yeah, before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and your work, and where can they join the the webinar? Great. Yeah. Thank you. So, you just head to the school or biohacking.com. That's our website. And you can sign up for the webinar there. And if you're listening to this after it's gone live, it's on February 21, you'll be able to access the recording. And then you can get details of our other programs, including the Buy Hacking instructor training program there as well. Awesome. We'll put the links in the show notes. And, my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or a habit that you wish you had a bit sooner? Mhmm. I if I had one piece of advice, it would be to really have allowed myself to experience more joy earlier in life and to strive less and to really enjoy other people's presence and company more. Mhmm. And just be more appreciative of what's around me and who's around me rather than constantly striving for the next thing and bigger and better. Yeah. That's good. Good to know because, yeah, we're never you know, even if you're in perfect health, but you're alone, then you're probably not gonna be very happy. Yep. Well, yeah, it was great to talk with you and super important topic. I hope, yeah, many people will resonate, with this. So, yeah, thank you for coming. Been my pleasure. Thank you so much, Tim. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Sim. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.