Yes, doing zero high intensity exercise is bad, but if you do too much then, it might be more harmful in the long term. There are actually randomized control trials where people who drink diet soda lose more weight than people who drink water. You shouldn't let your longevity routines be a bigger stressor than whatever you're trying to avoid. Hello and welcome everyone to this special episode of the Ship with CJ podcast. I'm here in the studio after a very long time and for a good reason Because today, I have a very, very, very special guest. My guest on the show today has done multiple things. I mean, I have been following him since 2016. He's wrote over nine books. He's best selling author. This guy is terrific on stage, terrific off stage, and he's been called the prodigy of biohacking. Everyone, please welcome Seemland. Seem, welcome to the show. Yes. I'm happy to be here. Oh, I'm so happy to I'm so happy that you are here with us. You have written a new book, which is called The Longevity Leap. Now you've written nine books. When you were growing up, did you like writing? Well, actually, not that much. Well, at least, like, not in high school. I wasn't keen on reading, classical literature or, writing essays or something. It was not something I was super interested in. But, doing, university, I did started to like it for some reason. And, studying anthropology, most of your exams and tests are essays or Mhmm. Something, not like a question and answer kind of tests. They're more like, you know, literature esque, tests. And, I was pretty good at it that I figured out that, I was able to write essays quite fast, and I was able to research, these, topics also quite fast. And it kinda grew onto me. During the last year of, my university, I did start my blog, which was back then centered around just, yeah, self care experimentation, health optimization, and biohacking, and all those different kind of topics, which then grew to my YouTube channel. And over the course of, yeah, now I've been doing it for, yeah, seven, eight years, the YouTube channel, and, it's always evolved and kept getting better. Like, right now, I think my content is, you know, 10 times better than it was, in the beginning. Maybe you can remember as well. But, Yeah. Well, I think your content back in the day was superb as well. And I was like, okay. Perfect. You're, like, one of the biggest sources that I would, go on to. Right. Yeah. Well, it has, you know, obviously, evolved a lot, and I'm covering nowadays mostly about longevity and health. So it's it's always been what I'm interested in and what I'm doing myself, the content that I create. And, right now, I've, yeah, I guess, evolved into caring most about longevity and lifespan? Longevity is a super cool topic. I mean, I have been interested in longevity ever since I was a kid. So a lot of people in my close circles were I come I'm like the black sheep of the family, so I'm the only one who's healthy. Like, I'm interested in the healthy stuff, and everyone else are like, you're just wasting your time. But those guys are also the ones who died really early. So I always had this thing where I'm not scared of death, but I'm always trying to optimize for in any shape or form to enhance longevity. Years later, years like, this was, like, three years ago, I was speaking to a tarot card reader, and she was, do you even know the meaning of your name? I didn't even reflect on it till then. So my name is Chiranjeev, which literally in Sanskrit translates to longevity Mhmm. Or, like, the blessing for I was like, wow. Perfect. Makes sense. But anyway, I wanna talk about your book. But I wanna do this a little bit differently because, you know, of course, you've been on, like, thousands of podcasts. Most of the times, we're talking about deep deep science, but I feel like these days people are having such short attention spans that most of the times we talk about things. And for you and me, we can go on for hours. But most of the times, people look into the science, and then they're just close off. In fact, one of my colleagues, he was telling me I was asking him to do some TikTok research, and he was telling me, hey, CJ. You know what's trending on TikTok right now? I was like, no. The video is split into two screens, and there is someone talking about something, and there's, like, a Minecraft go game going in the bottom. And I was like, oh, we really don't have any attention. Like, you know, ADHD hyper. So you, obviously, my friend, are in great shape. I want to talk to you about a few things that a lot of people have been asking me and, you know, since 2016 or even before that, these topics keep on coming up. So let's go through them one by one, and we can get your opinion on it. Mhmm. You can tell us what is underrated, what is overrated, what is some of the latest things that you have seen that is working. First thing that I wanna talk to you about is fact loss. You are in great shape. I know you work out very well, and you've optimized your life. But for a person who is trying to lose body fat or body weight, where do you start? What do you think has the most amount of ROI? What is plain bullshit? Any diet can result in fat loss and weight loss, and you can build muscle as well on pretty much any diet with a few key criteria. For fat loss, specifically, the biggest one is energy deficit, which, can be triggering for some people or they might disagree with it. But, you know, if you look at these metabolic ward studies where people are actually controlled for their entire food intake, they literally eat a certain amount of food, then, the calorie deficit always is the biggest determinant of, of, weight loss. And regardless if it's a low carb diet or a high carb diet. So, in the real world, it's obviously can be different because if you're living in a society without people controlling you and controlling your movements, then, of course, you're going to have cravings, you're going to have, opportunistic foods. You see a bagel, you're gonna eat the bagel or whatever the case is, like, someone brings you donuts at the work. You know, there's always these kind of situations in the in the free world that, can be, you know, disruptive or harmful to fat loss. So in the real world, what what matters most is the adherence to the diet, which means that are you able to stick to the diet? Are you able to stick to a lower calorie intake? Are you able to not feel so hungry that you're gonna overeat? And are are you able to do it for the long term? So, that's the biggest factor for fat loss in the real, free living world. And, there are some diets that obviously help to achieve that more easily and others less so. So for less hunger, more satiety, more energy, then you generally do better on a whole foods diet, you know, that prioritizes, protein, healthy fats, healthy carbs, fiber, and vegetables. You're just gonna feel very satiated and full. By doing that, they also stimulate all these different kind of, peptides in the gut that promotes a tie to, like, GLP one Mhmm. And those things. So, like, olive oil and fibers and protein, they all increase GLP one expression that makes you more satiated and you end up eating less food for the entire day. If you are someone who, you know, is is able to, like, control the calories and weigh all the food and be mindful of those things, then in that case, it doesn't yet matter that much which kind food you eat. You could theoretically lose weight on a Twinkie diet, which has been shown to be possible, and, you could likewise lose weight on a Whole Foods diet as long as the, you know, calories and the macros are, equal. And there's also some nuances here that affect the calorie balance, such as the macronutrients, a higher protein intake. So protein has the highest thermic effect of food, which means that you burn the most calories digesting protein. So if your diet is very high in protein, you're already, like, automatically losing certain amount of calories for digesting that protein. And because you're not eating, let's say, fats and carbs in replace of that, you'll be in a calorie deficit as a result of that. But it's still like calories in versus calories out because the protein you you're not absorbing all the calories in the protein because some of those calories are wasted on the digestion of that protein, if that makes sense. So, yeah, I mean, from a dietary perspective, you know, generally, whole foods and high protein diet is the best one. And, from exercise standpoint, then, with exercise, it's better to do some form of, you know, resistance training plus cardiovascular exercise for the general health benefits. You don't need to do exercise specifically to lose weight as long as you're in a calorie deficit, but, you know, it helps to create the calorie deficit. And, if done right, then it also improves metabolic health and reduces satiety and cravings, overall if you, let's say, do the right type of exercise. You mentioned craving, and this is very interesting because people can have, I mean, we know that willpower degrades as the day passes by. The more you use, the more you lose. It's also some people also say it's a muscle, so you can strengthen it. But, ideally, somewhere around the afternoon ish is when people start feeling their cravings. They start in the morning. There's enough glucose in the brain and, you know, they can make better decisions and then cravings come in. Are there any new you mentioned protein, just to recap for the audience. Protein is really good. Fiber is really good. There's also added benefits of the fiber acting in your gut, making things like butyrate or, you know, all of these short chain fatty acids, which will also help you feel, satiated too a bit. But is there any other trick or a hack that you've seen that, people the moment they're feeding cravings, they can is there, like, a one pill that can apart from all the GLP one, Right. Well, I mean, there are some supplements that could also increase GLP one and support weight loss like berberine. Mhmm. So there are actually quite a lot of, like, randomness control trials where berberine, somewhere like five hundred to fifteen hundred milligrams a day, helps with weight loss, and reducing waist circumference. And one of the mechanisms is that it increases GLP one. It's, of course, not nearly as effective as Ozempic or something. But it's, you know, if you're not super clinically obese, then berberine could help with that to a certain extent. And it also has antibacterial effects, so it can help to fight endotoxin and the bad bacteria in the gut. So that's one option. Another option, is it might be, again, more controversial, which is diet beverages or diet soda. Mhmm. So there are actually randomized controlled trials where people who drink diet soda lose more weight than people who drink water. Interesting. Which, you know, contradicts all the ideas that diet sodas make you gain weight and make you increase insulin that prevents fat loss and makes you diabetic. When you look at the actual randomized controlled trials, then you have people who consume diet beverages or, you know, are told to consume diet beverages, then they end up losing more weight than those who are drinking water. And maybe product reasons is because it's kind of, you know, tastes sweet. It kinda tastes like a treat, and you probably end up eating something you end up eating less something else that is sweet later. So if you're craving for sugar, you drink the Diet Coke, you're not gonna eat the donut or the bagel. Right. At least, you know, that's for what what could happen for some people. There's also probably some people who it's the opposite that they drink the diet soda and they end up craving more of the donuts and they end up eating the donut. You know, I guess, it's very individual, of the what the response might be, but there's nothing, let's say, objectively in the diet beverage that would make you gain weight or prevent the fat loss. If anything, then it could help to curb the cravings because, you know, at the end of the day, it's the calorie deficit. And if you if you're not eating anything, then you end up losing more weight. With water, you know, yes, water can also help with that if sometimes you might be dehydrated. I think sparkling water is a very good hack as well to reduce cravings and hunger because it it's tastier than regular water. Maybe the carbon dioxide may also have some pro metabolic effects, but it certainly helps with hunger and cravings. So as an extent, maybe squeeze a bit of lemon or some electrolytes in there or something like that, you can make it flavored as well. But sometimes, regular sparkling water can help. Out of my personal experience, every time I feel, not like craving, but I know that I'm getting hungry, every time I have sparkling water, it completely at least for the next hour, it diminishes it. And I also like what you said about the lemon and, some salt so you get some electrolytes in. Sometimes it's hydration. Sometimes, you know, the mineral balance is completely low. And because of that, our cells are not able to perform the duties that they're usually doing, and giving them a little bit of extra support works. And it's super interesting about this diet soda thing because I haven't heard about this before. But now when I reflect back, I know a lot of people who are watching their calories, but they will always I have very close people. They will not enter a restaurant unless and until they can have diet they choose their brand, either Diet Coke or Diet Pepsi, whichever fan they are of. But with every meal, they have to have it. And, usually, I see that they're the ones who naturally go to this 80%. They will never go to a 100%. They'll have their meal. They'll have their Diet Pepsi, which is a nonnegotiable, and seems to look like they have much more control of their appetite. So there could be something fantastic. You mentioned berberine as well. Berberine also I mean, it also works with in your book, you talk about, comparing berberine with metformin, which is, let's call it, diabetes drug or, like, something that can a glucose disposal agent, pharmaceutical, which is very powerful. Have you experimented with metformin? Because I know a lot of people now that they're like, okay. You know what? We read it on a pod or we saw it on a podcast. We'll we'll do one fourth of the dose of metformin. Do you have any experiences of, using those? I have taken it, for some time. Not right now, but, Yeah. I mean, the research about metformin is quite interesting. It's certainly very beneficial for people who have diabetes or insulin resistance and, reduces risk of heart disease and cancer in diabetics. So it's literally a life saving for diabetics. For in the longevity space, it's always also associated with reduced mortality in nondiabetics, mostly from, like, a past study that found that nondiabetics who didn't take metformin had worse mortality risk than the diabetics who were taking metformin, which would be very, let's say, contradictory in the sense that diabetes, you know, increases your mortality risk, and nondiabetics saw a higher mortality risk than the diabetics who were taking metformin. So it would be that metformin somehow completely negates the negative effects of diabetes and also improves your mortality chances compared to not even having diabetes. But, that study was with a few flaws and the reanalysis of that whether it was done, I think, two one one to two years ago, they found that it's not the case that, diabetes is still bad and metformin isn't going to be better than not having diabetes. So, with that being said, I do think that metformin, yeah, if you have even, you know, maybe not even full blown diabetes, but if you have slightly impaired glucose metabolism, you're, like, prediabetic or even not not even there, you know, just have, like, not the best metabolic health. It can be for sure, like, a net positive. It's certainly more powerful than berberine in improving blood sugar levels. Berberine is better at cholesterol and lipid lowering effects than metformin. But metformin is better than, at the blood sugar lowering effects. So I think metformin is useful for people. Yeah. If you and even then, like, you're a healthy person, you might, okay, I'm gonna eat birthday cake or whatever. You you could, yeah, like, hack it with metformin and take the metformin, which is better than, I guess I mean, yeah, if you're a healthy person, then even eating regular birthday cake every once in a while isn't a bad thing in the long term. Like, if you do it once, then you're you're just manage your glucose. Yeah. It's it's just gonna be or Yeah. It's it's just gonna be or have any long term negative effects on your health, but you could theoretically biohack it with taking Metformin. Have you experimented with dihydroberine? Yes. And what do you think, like, berberine versus dihydroberine? In your per because the study shows it's four times more powerful. But in your personal experience, did you feel much of a difference? I I didn't use, like, a CGM to see, like Okay. How it would compare to regular berberine. But, I mean, let's say it is, like, more powerful than berberine, but it's also more expensive, so to say. So, it And it's not available everywhere. It's different to find it. I think, you know, regular berberine already gets the job done if you're just a healthy person who wants to improve slightly with fat loss or, blood sugar levels or lipids, for example. And if you're diabetic, then you'll be better off by taking metformin anyway. Okay. That's good. Although berberine can be done together with metformin, with, beneficial effects. Interesting. Okay. Perfect. Now let's move on to the second biggest problem that we see, especially in a city like Dubai, which is sleep deprivation. Sleep deprivation because people are not able to shut off their mind, sleep deprivation because people have, poor lifestyle choices, which makes them sleep voluntarily late at night. And and, yeah, some people have, just their sleep wake cycles are a little bit messed up. Some days, they're working in the morning. Some days, they're working in the evening. So what what do you have to say about sleep? Because I know you're back in the years, I've seen your Oura ring scores, and I've seen 99 or a 100 many times as well. So how do you hack your sleep? Yes. Sleepy is very important. I think that, you know, you should still have exercise and, the diet and everything else on point because, you know, sleep only is going to enhance your recovery from exercise, but it's not innately going to make you healthy. Mhmm. Like, if you sleep even, like, nine hours per night, let's say you're getting plenty of sleep, it only, like, maintains your health, but it's not going to improve your metabolic health in of itself without the addition of exercise. It's not going to make you build muscle without exercise. It's not going to make you, Lose weight. Lose weight without exercise. But if you are sleep deprived, then it's going to, yeah, make it very much harder to lose weight and especially lose fat. You'll you're more prone to lose muscle in a calorie deficit if you're sleep deprived at the same time. Yeah. With sleep, the biggest problems in the modern world are psychological reasons, you know, stress, anxiety, or just rumination, environmental reasons, mostly like light, maybe EMF, maybe noise, traffic noise, all those things. And the third would be, like, dietary components as well. So, eating too late, eating foods that increase your heart rate, make you pee in the night, or something else like that. You do need to, like, pay attention to all of them. The easiest things are the environment. You can just use blue blocking glasses. You can use a sleep mask. You can, put filters on your smartphones so you can you're not gonna get the blue light in your eyes before bed that would inhibit melatonin production and increase your alertness. And, you could also change light bulbs in your house or dim down the lights. Those are, like, very effective ways to preserve your melatonin. And for the noise, earplugs or noise cancelling headphones or something like that. For the food, it's also relatively easy. I I believe that, having a slightly earlier dinner tends to improve sleep more than eating too close to bed. So I've, you know, tried different eating windows. I've eaten one hour before bed. I've eaten four hours before bed, five hours before bed. And, generally, I sleep the best if my dinner is something like, you know, five five hours before bed. Five hours. Okay. Yeah. I usually have dinner at 4PM, finished by 5PM, and then I have four and a half, five hours before I go to bed. And the food choices, you know, as long as it's not something super heavy, it should be, you know, fine. Mhmm. Generally, like, very very processed foods, very salty foods, spicy, fried foods, they tend to be worse for the sleep and, some healthy proteins. And I do think them healthy carbs are also very beneficial for sleep. So you have tryptophan, which is one of the amino acids you get from protein that gets converted to serotonin, and that serotonin gets converted to melatonin. But the issue is that if you just only eat, let's say, protein, then you're getting all these other amino acids as well that compete with tryptophan's entry into the brain. So you're not getting the serotonin boost from just protein alone, unless you're getting also a lot of sunlight exposure and, during the daytime, etcetera. But one way to circumvent that is to eat carbohydrates with the protein. How much do you sorry to cut you, but, like, then there's always this question. Okay. Someone told me to eat carbs, and now this is my free pass of eating carbs. Ideally, do you have a ratio of carb to protein, or is just, like, make sense of, like, whatever you're doing that day and use? Yeah. It depends on the person and their their requirements. So, you know, I can eat several 100 grams of carbs a day and, be very fine. For someone else, it can be a recipe for high blood sugar and other issues. So it depends a lot on their particular metabolic health and situation. So, yeah, I don't think there's any one size fits all macros for everyone. I do think that protein is pretty much the same for everyone. So if you're getting something like 1.6 grams per kilogram per per kilogram for of protein per day, then, that already maximizes muscle growth effects, and it you know, you get satiety and, all the nutrients you would need from that amount of protein as well. So you don't need, like, massive amounts of protein. And everything else, fats and carbs, is kind of whichever you prefer. So there's no, like, specific amount of carbs your body needs. With fats, you do need a certain amount, but it's not high amounts of fat. So if you're getting 50 to 70 grams of fat per day, then, that's already covering all the essential functions that your body needs. So I prefer that kind of approach that I take my protein, take my fats, and everything else comes from carbs for me. Someone else, it might be, you know, different. Mhmm. But, yeah, going back to the carbs, then eating the carbs, you know, it's not you don't have to have a massive amount. Just just a regular amount of, carbohydrates like a sweet potato, a banana, kiwis before bed actually have been shown to improve sleep. So, like, two kiwis, they're very good for sleep, and just some healthy fruits or something like that. That's more than enough to help with tryptophan getting into the brain to, help with, the sleep. What about supplements? Any favorites? Yeah. I mean, for sleep, melatonin is very well researched and, proven to work for sleep latency and sleep duration. And interestingly, there was a recent meta analysis of a several clinical trials where they saw that the optimal way to take melatonin for the sleep was four milligrams three hours before bed. Mhmm. Although they did compare it only to, like, a two milligram dose thirty minutes before bed. Maybe smaller doses would be, you know, better or something else, but, yeah, it makes sense if you take four milligrams three hours before bed. So by the time you're already going to bed, you have higher levels of melatonin. Because if you your melatonin supplementation can shift, your circadian rhythms in either direction. So if you take it too early, then you're shifting your circadian rhythm earlier. If you take it too late, like, immediately before bed, then you're actually shifting your circadian rhythm later. Probably not the best idea to take it only immediately before bed. Probably better to take it A few hours before bed. Few hours before bed because then you're already kind of tired from that melatonin when you go to bed. What about have you tried experimenting with high dose melatonins, like hundred mg, two hundred mg? I haven't tried a hundred milligrams. I've tried, like, ten milligrams. It's, yeah, research is quite interesting that this ten ten milligrams is shown to have anti inflammatory effects, also lowers lipids and, improves metabolic health. It didn't feel you know, maybe there's some adaptation period. I I didn't feel, like, very, you know, energized in the mornings because of that, over over body. Right? Yeah. Always felt like a melatonin hangover a little bit. Melatonin hangover. Yeah. I haven't tried the hundred milligrams. Yeah. I have found that on Amazon, there are, like, pills with hundred milligrams, supplements, but I haven't found them in Europe. So, you know, maybe in The in The US, I'll try it out. Mhmm. But it's also strange to look at supplements because I think there have been so many different examinations or different supplements, and they show that in certain categories, like melatonin, you could either be getting, like, a 20 to 40% higher melatonin or lower melatonin based on different, different brands. Correct? Yeah. Yeah. The it can be something like up to four hundred seven seventy percent that is Oh, wow. More. 470%. That's crazy. Yeah. But, I mean, it let's say the you get one milligram pill Zero point three or yeah. Yeah. So it's four hundred and seventy percent. It's four point seven milligrams. So it's very small amounts, though. So interesting. Like, one thing that went in my head while you were talking about this is also the idea of, calories in versus calories out. Right? CECO. We know that it is one of the most important factors, like you mentioned, but also the modern ways of estimating calories or these the ratios that are online. So if anyone who's listening, there are different kind of, like, Harris Benedict ratio and all these other ratios where people can go in, they can type in their age, how active they are, what kind of, yeah, what kind of things they have, and then it'll give you, like, an estimated calorie ratio or, like, calorie intake for maintenance, for growth, for fat loss. But just a good thing to highlight, like, sometimes and I wanna know your views on this. If we read a protein bar is, like, 200 calories, then most likely, it's not 200 calories. There is some some sort of, you know, I think it's, like, 15 to 20%. It could be above or below. And, also, when you look at life as a, like, a general thing, all of these small percentages, they add up. And, also, they say now that sometimes you look at for the average person who is on a cardio machine, they're on a separate machine, and they estimate that they're burning x amount of calories, and then they're looking at their diet. So the point I wanna bring forward is also look at it from a flexibility point. Not everything is grain and stone, and there can be some calculations which are so listen to your body mostly. But, like, yeah, I'd like to know your It's not a perfect method. And I guess the the, main idea isn't so much that there is a specific number that your body has. There's yeah. Like, it's true. Your body doesn't have a cal calorie meter, so to say, but there is an energy balance. And so and calories are just the way to assess, kinda predict that energy content and predict the energy balance of your body. So the energy balance can be completely different from the whatever the numbers the calculators say or the food has, but the point is that there is an energy balance after which and, you know, many things affect that energy balance. Hormones, time of day, sleep Toxins. Excess. Yeah. I mean, there's a lot of thyroid function, you know, those things influence the energy balance, but there is an energy balance. So to say, we don't have a perfect way to measure that energy balance and there are some, you know, exceptions to the rule, but usually those exceptions aren't permanent. You know, if you if you starve yourself for, let's say, seven days, you're on very low calorie diet and you start eating again, it feels like you could eat everything and you're not gaining weight. Mhmm. Because it's a it's a very extreme scenario where your body becomes very inefficient at absorbing the nutrients as well. And, you're actually not, you know, storing the weight. But it's a short term adaptation. If you do that, if you eat, like, 10,000 calories for three months, you're gonna eventually start gaining the weight back and you're, you know it's it's just an example that, there's, you know, it's very adaptive system, obviously. But the reason, like, an energy balance, that energy balance fluctuates a lot. We don't have a perfect way to assist that. Another ex extreme example is, you know, bodybuilders. Mhmm. They're the leanest people in the world, and, they're also the most meticulous with that. And they always, you know, they pretty much everyone of if you wanna get to Olympia, mister Olympia stage, you know, you're competing with everyone who's counting calories and counting macros. And, the one who is getting the leanest generally you know, of course, there's a lot of things as well, steroids and hormones that affect that. But, generally, you know, they all count calories very meticulously. They are preparing very hard for that role, and they're also the leanest. So if you're taking, like, an extreme example, then, you know, calories matter for them Yeah. A 100%. I remember seeing this old school, Ronnie Coleman videos where he used to wake up at 4AM or, like, 03:30AM, and he's like Right. I've gotta complete my one meal, so I have to just wake up and eat this one meal. Of course, we were kids back then, but it was interesting to see what kind of dedication and passion these guys have. Right. Now let's, you spoke about something interesting, which was exercise. So let's move on to exercise. In your book, you talk about the j shaped curve of exercise. Mhmm. And you also have certain numbers. Okay. You know what? Nine hundred minutes per week of maybe just light walking, yoga, things like that. And then a few minutes for high intensity. First, let's just start off with the j key shape curve of exercise, and then you can build on there for longevity and muscle gain and all of that. Yeah. So exercise, obviously, is beneficial for health, and it has a lot of health benefits. Like, it's the only thing that pretty much we know will reduce your risk of chronic diseases and extend health span specifically. You know, the evidence of maximum lifespan is somewhat more limited, but it certainly keeps you healthy for longer and keeps you youthful for longer. So you're able to do your everyday activities that tend to decline with, with age. So you're able to carry your groceries, you know, lift things, run around. If you exercise, you're able to do it for much longer, granted you're not getting injured at some point. But, yeah, like, too much exercise can be, of course, harmful. It's a positive stressor that if you're not doing enough or not at all, then you're experiencing increased harm. If you're doing too much, then you're also experiencing increased harm. So the sweet spot, the summer, you know, moderate amounts of, exercise. And, there's quite a lot of research about this topic. It's, again, it's hard to make any definite conclusions about that because many studies, they don't they're not standardized in the way to, like, measure these things. They don't standardize with resistance training, for example. They don't standardize the intensities and how much time you rest between sets, how many sets and reps reps you do. They only look at, okay, how many minutes per week do you do resistance training. So it's not a perfect, let's say, conclusion, but, you know, theoretically, still excess exercise, excess resistance training, excess interval training, excess cardio, all of it can be, harmful. Let's talk about what do you do, because I think you figured for sure, you figured 99% of it out so we can, like, learn from what you're doing every day. Yeah. I can share I can share what what my interpretation and conclusions based on the literature I've read is. And, one thing that, yeah, really changed my mind about it a lot was, a 2023 review that looked at all the major studies done over the last five, six years on exercise, and they all came to the conclusion that with moderate intensity exercise, it's pretty much as much as you can do, the better it is. So it was like a linear association with reduced mortality and reduced heart disease. So, you know, a hundred minutes per week of moderate intensity exercise, which is, 40 to 60% of your max heart rate, that's better than zero, but nine hundred minutes was better than a hundred minutes. So it's like a linear association. You know, they didn't look beyond that. Maybe at some point, maybe if you do two thousand minutes, maybe it's gonna be harmful. But at least nine hundred minutes per week is still beneficial. And I'm trying to add more of this moderate intensity exercise rather than only doing high intensity exercise. Give us an example of this moderate Moderate intensity is like so 40 to 60% of your max heart rate, and it depends a lot on your age. If you're older, then that's lower heart rate. For me, I'm 30. So for me, it's, something between the range of, like, 90 to a 115 beats per minute heart rate. So, like, four like a light light jog. It can be light jog or light light cycling, hiking, speed walking, you know Zone two. Stretching, some sort of animal flow, mobility exercises. Yeah. Zone zone two is 60 to 70%. Okay. Sorry. So it can it can be that, but it has to be slightly lower intensity, just light movement. And, I just, you know, go for walks, generally every day, do some How long are you walking? Because in the book, you said that six if I correct me if I'm wrong, you said that people who walk 8,000 steps versus 16,000 steps, 16,000 steps has a 5% decrease in all cause mortality. No. It's, so that compared to people who walk 2,000 steps a day Oh, it's a those who walk 8,700 steps a day have sixty percent lower old cord mortality and fifty one percent lower heart disease. But going from eighty seven hundred to 16,000 provides an additional five percent. Okay. So those who walk 16,000 have sixty five percent lower mortality risk compared to those who walk 2,000. So you wanna get at least, you know, the the majority of the benefits come from going to, like, 8,009 steps. If you go if you double that, then you get only 5% extra. How much are you walking? I I walk usually something like maybe 10,000. Mhmm. So I'm not going, a girl Crazy or not. For the 16,000. I'm going 9,000, 10,000, 12,000, something in that range. Yeah. So I'm walking. I'm doing if I, yeah, go for forest walk or hiking or something like that, that that's nice. I do light cardio quite a lot every week, maybe two hours per week of this zone two on the 60% of heart rate. That's pretty much it. With high intensity exercise or vigorous exercise, which is, you know, 70 and above percent, first of all, it provided less risk reduction than a moderate intensity exercise. So it's still, yeah, to a certain point, provided a reduction in the risk of mortality and heart disease. But, at some point, it became like a j shaped curve that if you do it too much, I don't recall exactly, but for heart disease, it was, if it was above two hundred and forty minutes or three hundred minutes, somewhere in that range, then, it started to provide it it, like, reversed the course that it started to increase the risk. And, my takeaway from that is that, yes, doing zero high intensity exercise is bad. But if you do too much over four hours, five hours per week, then, it might be more harmful in the long term. So I'm trying to achieve this sweet spot somewhere in the, like, range of two hundred fifty minutes of vigorous intensity exercise. So that's, interval training and resistance training. So what I'm doing is I'm doing three times a week. I'm lifting weights, which, totals in about a hundred and eighty minutes per week. And then I'm doing a interval training as well for thirty minutes, maybe twice a week. So that will put me in the range of 240, 250 per week of vigorous, intensive exercise. What's your training split like? Because ever since I've known you or, you know, seen you multiple times in different conferences, Your body shape, like, I remember you were in London, you were super lean, and then maybe we met in The US or somewhere we met, and then you were, like, super buff, like which was also not like the buff that everyone imagines with a little bit of fat, but, like, super chisel, but, like, super buff. And, like, now you're in great shape. So what over the years, how has your training split or training styles changed? Are you doing more bodybuilding? Are you implementing some CrossFit or one one set to failure? Or what's your current, training look like? I like strength, power lifting style. I'm not, like, interested in getting massive in with muscle mass, but I am interested in increasing lifts on the main compound lifts, squat deadlift, and bench, and those kind of things. So I'm focusing on those most of the time. And, yeah, the reps are gonna be something like five to six reps per set. That's what I found works, very nice, for me. And, three sets three sets of five, for example, is a is a working set usually for one exercise. And, I do, you know, calisthenics obviously as well. I like calisthenics. I might do some kettlebells. I use kettlebells for most of some high intensity intervals or some circuit training or something like that. But I I like to keep them slightly separate, so smashing all things together like doing cardio with weights. I don't like to do them together. If I'm doing cardio, then I'm doing the cardio. If I'm doing weights, then I'm focusing on the strength. And I'm not even trying to even, like, get super exhausted with the weights. I'm focusing on the strength and and, power with those exercises. And with interval training, then I am trying to actually increase my heart rate to high. Interesting. Okay. So I think we've got enough on the exercise piece. Thank you. Let's jump on to longevity. Here, I want you to give us, like, your top now you've written a book and you've written multiple books and you speak to experts all over the world. Give us, like, your three to five top tips for longevity. You can just list them out or, like, we can go one by one and you can think about it, and then we can just dive into those top three or top five. Yeah. I think first would be be deliberate about it deliberate about it in a sense that, you know, track things and see where your health is at. Longevity is very complicated, and we don't have, like, a perfect understanding about it. And there's always some people live long despite smoking and despite, drinking alcohol and living a very nonhealthy lifestyle. The Blue zones, James Clement, that Yeah. So a lot of a lot of yeah. Like, we everyone knows, like, a grandpa who smoked and lived to a 100. Right? But, at the same time, there's also millions of grandpas who smoke and, you know, don't make it past 70. So it's, you shouldn't look at these exceptions to the rule because there are there's probably something else that's going on genetically that enabled them to live so long. So we don't have, yeah, like, a perfect understanding of, okay, why do these people live so long? But we what we do know is that, okay, there are certain chronic diseases that kill most people in their seventies and eighties, like heart disease and cancer and neurodegeneration. So you just wanna focus on reducing your risk of, those diseases. And the way you do that is by of course, you can follow what the evidence says about healthy lifestyle, diet, exercise, etcetera. But how do you know that you're still not heading in the wrong direction? You you know that by looking at your blood work and looking at what's inside your body with different tests and scans. So I think that's a very, you know, crucial component of longevity for mortals without, excellent genetics. So you look at your, you know, blood pressure, lipids, blood sugar, all these different blood markers that, you know, typically typically get worse with age and at certain ranges are associated with diabetes or kidney disease or something like that. If you could see that your blood sugar is, you know, creeping up, then, you know, you can fix your lifestyle. You can, you know, take berberine, metformin, or change your diet, whatever it looks weight. They all will yeah. They will some people might need, like, a wake up call that, usually, the wake up call happens when they get diagnosed with diabetes, unfortunately, which isn't too late. Like, there are certain percentage of people who do get whatever chronic disease and still make it to a 100, but it's much smaller percentage, compared to those who, you know, avoid these chronic diseases and make it to a 100. So the best thing is to avoid these chronic diseases by tracking your blood work and, adjusting your lifestyle according to the results of that. The second tip would be to invest into your physical reserve, cognitive reserve, and social reserve. We know that, poor muscle mass and muscle strength and frailty, they are predictors of increased mortality later in life. And the older you get, the harder it is to maintain those things. So you need to build, like, a reserve. You need to build when when it's relatively easy, even in your fifties, it's quite easy to still build muscle compared to if you're 80. So you need to build a reserve of, you know, physical density, like muscle mass and strength and the bone density, as well as, you know, cardiovascular fitness as well that you have a good cardio system. You you can build that reserve earlier in life so that when you're 80, you're not falling behind, which puts you at a much higher increased risk of pre premature death. And the same with, your cognition, there's thing called, cognitive reserve and brain reserve, which refers to your brain's ability to counteract this age related decline in cognitive function. So things like education, learning new languages, new experiences, socializing, healthy diet, those lifelong cognitive work, those things, maintain your cognitive function and build this cognitive reserve that it doesn't completely protect against neurodegeneration, but it does reduce the symptoms of cognitive decline later in life. And the last one is also the social reserve. Loneliness increases with age. The older you get, the more likely you are to be alone. And, one of the biggest predictors of longevity is social relationships and happiness and, you know, feeling good about yourself and others. If you don't have that, you know, social reserve, then, again, it's, first of all, you might not have the desire to live, that long. And second of all, it's also a big predict predictor of, chronic diseases and mortality. Even something like, you know, you're 80 years old, you fall, there's no one else to call the ambulance for for whatever, help you need, And, you know, that you're gonna have worse outcome compared to you have someone in your house like a spouse or child or grandchild who who can call the ambulance and get you the help you need. That can be like life saving if you're 80 years old, for example. So building up your social reserve, physical reserve, and cognitive reserve. And it has to start, you know, early. You you need to build it throughout your life. And the last tip would be not being too attached to this. You shouldn't let your longevity routines be a bigger stressor than whatever you're trying to avoid. So if, you're very neurotic and stressed out about your exercise and diet and and supplements, air pollution or seed oils or artificial sweeteners. Like, if you ever have, like, a very fearful mindset about the world, then chances are it's gonna cause more stress. And, I think it also just means that you're you might not have the confidence in your own body's ability to be resilient. You're just more vulnerable to all these things. Whereas if you're confident and healthy about your your ability to bounce back from whatever unhealthy thing you're doing, then, yeah, it it becomes a more harmful thing. The last point because, I think, you know, there are multiple books written on it, the Biology Belief by Bruce Lipton. We in the traditional Indian and the yogic sciences culture have been talking about this for the year, like, thousands and thousands of years that every word, every action, every thought that you are having or you're saying, it's not just a person that is around us listening to it, it's also your cells. So the more you keep being fearful and the more you keep saying, oh, see, those this this might wreck wreck my sleep or today I missed the workout and I'm not gonna be as strong tomorrow. Your body is just going to be like and there are trillions of cells. They're just gonna be like, okay. Perfect. Mhmm. These are our instructions. Let's let's follow what you're saying. And then it's like a vicious cycle. Right? You do that. You get a little bit of dopamine, and then it happens again and again. And someone says, oh, yeah. If you have friends, which are also saying, oh, yeah. We're not gonna do it because, you know, we might just miss, miss our steps or my rings for today. And then it just creates that, fearful thing. Longevity is something that a lot of people are doing so they can add quality to their life and, you know, quality in terms of the years, in terms of their movement, in terms of their relationship. So anything that you will do at this point to destroy that quality, I think you should think about it. And thank you so much for pointing that out. I can talk to you for hours and hours, but, that's a lot of things for people to digest. So we'll let people digest it, and then you're here next time. We can ask people what questions they specifically had and then build from there. If if someone had to ask me, oh, you're interviewing Sam, who is this guy? I'm like, think about biohacking longevity and wellness. It's like a trained AI chat GPT kind of a mind. Like, you can ask him anything, and he's just gonna be able to tell you the latest and the greatest. So chat GPT four point o or whatever is the updated one. So what's what's next for you? Yeah. So, my new book, The Longevity, came out last year. I am working on another one. It's about supplements. So I'm gonna make, like, a supplement bible to just Perfect. Cover, what what the evidence says about different supplements. I'm organizing, like, some retreats, in India, maybe in the future, in Dubai as well. It's like a health retreat for diagnostics and, treatments. And other than that, I'm, yeah, yep, actively just, posting on, on YouTube and Instagram. Thank you for educating us. I I want to thank you from on behalf of the rest of the world because I know the kind of content you have and the kind of lives that you have inspired. You've certainly been an inspiration for me. Like, I remember long time ago, I think you were talking about when you left university or when you were in university, you took a year to read 300 books or 200 books or something, like, around that number. Right. And I was like, man, that's what I should do. Right. You know? So, I mean, reading and all of these things and, guys, come on. Like, we are going back we're in 2025. We're talking 2015, sixteen, seventeen, nine years maybe. Mhmm. But, yeah, you've been inspiring me for that time. I really appreciate that, and I'm sure hundreds of other thousands of other people. Now what I wanna check with you is, imagine if you can go back to your younger self. You you have this time you take the time machine principle or whatever. You go back to your younger self. You can peek back and say, hi, little sim. Maybe sim last year. Here's one piece of advice. What advice would you give yourself? For general life or Anything. Health. You can even say, oh, buy crypto. Digital. Right. One, thing, yeah, is to take shortcuts in your life to not have to go through all those things yourself. So it's, yeah, better to learn from someone else or from others, which I have, you know, done throughout the life, but, do that more. Learn from others more to, shortcut your learning curve. Yeah. I guess that's That's that that's amazing. Because I guess, at the end of the day, there are only two paths. One is a longer path, which has a lot of hurdles. You might get hurt. You might never make it, and you might spend an entire life, and you might get a little bit closer. And then there is the other part, which is, I guess, more of the biohacking mindset. Listen to people who have walked that path. Listen to people who are already there. You are twenty years behind them. They can mentor you. They can coach you. But the idea is, you know, go out there and try to make your life easier. And the only way you can make your life easier is to avoid the things that you will get into doing anyway. So there's a slow route. There's the fast route. You guys decide. And, Sim, thank you so much for joining me. Where can people find you? Where can people buy the book? My website is seemland.ceo. Seem Land on YouTube and Instagram. And, yeah, the book is on Amazon, the the Laundry with Leap. Cool. I will put all these, in the show links, and you guys will be able to access it. His Instagram and YouTube is off the charts, so I highly recommend it. And this is me, CJ, your host signing out of the Ship for CJ podcast. Everyone, have a great day. Have a great week, and, actually, have a great lifetime. God bless everyone. Thank you soon.