You've probably heard that lutein and zeaxanthin are good for your eyes. And that's true. Several human clinical trials show these compounds can improve vision and reduce digital eye strain. But what if I told you that these nutrients don't just protect your eyes? They also protect your brain, your skin, and in animal studies they might even extend lifespan. In this video, I'm gonna explain how these carotenoids work and why they seem to benefit multiple organ systems such as your eyes, brain, and skin. Let's start with the research on eye health. There are human randomized controlled trials and meta analysis showing that lutein and zeaxanthin supplementation improves eye strain, dry eyes, and macular pigment optical density, MOPD, which is an indicator of eye health. The doses for that range from five to twenty milligrams a day. Doses below five milligrams haven't been seen to have an effect. This study also found that lutein ten milligrams a day and zeaxanthin two milligrams a day was also seen to reduce the progression of age related macular degeneration by thirty one percent compared to placebo. Those taking the supplements had a hundred and ninety to two hundred and ten percent higher serum lutein and zeaxanthin concentrations after one year. Children receiving gummies with ten milligrams of lutein and two milligrams of zeaxanthin have a 25% increase in macular pigment optical density, improved attention, memory, learning, and reduced eye strain after six months. They also have higher serum levels of BDNF or brain derived neurotrophic factor which increases the growth of brain cells. So does this mean that lutein and zeaxanthin are also good for the brain? Interestingly, yes. Supplementing with lutein and zeaxanthin has been shown to improve visual memory, learning, and cognitive function in people with cognitive complaints in randomized controlled trials. The doses range from ten to twelve milligrams for lutein and two milligrams of zeaxanthin for six to twelve months. Higher carotenoid levels in the brain and blood are associated with better cognitive function, better memory, and learning, and a reduced incidence of dementia in children as well as centenarians. On the other hand, low blood carotenoid levels are associated with a higher risk of dementia, mild cognitive impairment, and cognitive dysfunction. The reason these eye supplements are good for the brain is because your eyes are a direct extension of your brain. The eyes are directly connected to the brain and they're similar in function. The eyes are one of the most power hungry organs you have and they have one of the most amount of mitochondria similar to the brain. Because they contain a lot of mitochondria, they're also the most vulnerable to oxidative stress because that's where most of the energy production occurs. Artificial blue light especially damages the retina in the eyes as well as the mitochondria and carotenoids mitigate that damage and protect against artificial blue light specifically which is why they reduce digital eye strain. There's an additional reason why eye health is crucial to your overall longevity. You see the majority of your circadian rhythm signaling also occurs through the eyes that tell the brain what time of the day it is based on the wavelengths of light. With age, circadian rhythm regulation worsens as I've shared before in my other videos and this results in lower hormone production, circadian rhythm dysregulation and worse sleep quality. So I hope you can start to see why protecting your eyes is crucial for protecting your brain against aging and why it also has a central role in overall longevity. As your eyes get weaker, as your eyesight gets worse with age, your brain detects less of these circadian rhythms because the transmission to the brain through the eyes is weaker. I wouldn't be surprised if part of the reason why older people have worse circadian function is because of their worsening eyesight. The worsening eyesight precipitates the decline in brain function. So taking care of your eyes is more important than you think and these carotenoids do protect your eyes. Besides lutein in zeaxanthin, another popular carotenoid, aaxanthin, has also been seen to improve eyesight as well as improve symptoms of dry eye disease. This does bring me to aaxanthin which has also been seen to extend lifespan in animals. One of the more known and established benefits of aaxanthin in humans is skin health. Similar to the eyes, aaxanthin protects the skin against oxidative stress, specifically UV radiation from the sun. Which is why aaxanthin is often called internal sunscreen. Higher azaaxanthin makes your skin more resilient against the sun. Two systematic reviews of randomized controlled trials have seen that azaaxanthin supplementation improves skin elasticity, skin moisture and photoaging. So asaxanthin protects the eyes, asaxanthin also protects your skin, do lutein and zeaxanthin protect your skin because they do protect your eyes? Yes. Human trials show they do. They have skin protective effects as well as improvements on skin tone and skin pigmentation, and the evidence is quite plentiful. The reason these carotenoids protect your skin is because of the same reasons they protect your eyes. They're very powerful antioxidants and they mitigate UV radiation and UV damage, Especially, if we were to look at it over the course of years and decades. In fact, aaxanthin is said to be 6,000 times more potent of an antioxidant than vitamin c in cell studies. In living organisms, the effect is about 500 to 600 times but that's still a very significant amount. This means that azeaxanthin is incredibly potent compared to regular antioxidants like vitamin c. So far we've talked about lutein, zeaxanthin, and azeaxanthin which are the more known carotenoids, but there are a few others with some interesting research. Beta carotene is a carotenoid you get from orange vegetables like carrots and sweet potatoes. Lycopene is a red carotenoid from tomatoes and other red vegetables or fruits. They tend to improve the pigmentation and coloration of your skin, giving it a more tanned glow without getting an actual tan. A 2017 study found that beta carotene supplementation at a dose of thirty milligrams a day for twelve weeks changed skin color and pigmentation in a way that enhanced self perceived health and attractiveness in men. However, they saw no effect on oxidative stress or immune markers. Beta carotene and lycopene reduce the oxidative stress caused by UV radiation. They reduce inflammation in the skin, reduce UVA induced pigmentation and increase UV resistance in the skin. There's much less research about beta carotene and lycopene when it comes to skin health and overall health, but they do have some evidence for skin aesthetic reasons such as skin pigmentation and coloration. All in all, I think lutein, zeaxanthin and asexanthin are god tier supplements. The reason is that they have a lot of mechanistic evidence as well as human evidence. And if you look at the studies, they do work for skin health, eye health, and potentially brain health. I don't think everyone needs to supplement these carotenoids, but they are a low hanging fruit in terms of improving skin health, eye health, and overall inflammation status. Check out my video where I rank a 100 supplements from worst to best next.