Let's say the hallmarks of fatty liver are insulin resistance, high triglycerides, inflammation, and then gut microbiome imbalances. So for those individuals, they need to hear that you can optimize your diet, do smart things with your supplements, and hey, even walk a hundred fifty minutes a week, and you can significantly reduce your liver fat content and reverse the condition. You don't necessarily need to lose 30 kilos. Welcome to the C Man podcast. Our guest today is Andy DeSantis. Andy is a registered dietitian in Toronto, and he has a master's degree in public health nutrition. Andy, welcome to the show. Thank you so much for having me. It's a pleasure to be here. Yeah. I'm happy to have you. And, you talk a lot about, the liver, which in a lot of ways is one of the most underrated organs in the body and it's definitely very important. And it's also very, like, I guess, unique in the sense that, you know, you could, you know, lose almost entire entirety of your liver, and it would still be able to regenerate, so which is not the case with, like, your heart or your brain even. So, yeah, maybe we can get started with, you know, why is the liver, you know, so important when it comes to overall health? Yeah. Well, the fact of the matter is the liver performs over 500 functions in the human body. Right? On a broad level, some of those functions include carbohydrate metabolism, fat metabolism, protein metabolism, iron metabolism. It stores vitamin d. It stores other vitamins. But the most famous function and what it's most known for and, you know, you know, arguably, its most important function is the, the detoxification function. Right? Because when blood and and I'm sure this will come out in today's discussion, but when blood flows flows through the digestive system, it goes to the liver next before it is suitable to enter the rest of the body. And there's a very important reason for that. It's because, you know, it needs to be detoxified, certain things need to be recycled, and so on. So that would be a glimpse of some of the liver's functionalities. Gotcha. Yeah. And how did you get involved with, you know, making a liver your one of the main focuses? Yeah. It's a great question. Essentially, what I found is I you know, as a professional in the space of nutrition, you know, over a decade now, have written several books, looked into broad areas, helped people with many different issues. What I found is that liver health is a very good proxy for my philosophy, which by that I mean, I have a I have a vision for what high level eating is. And if I want to share that vision broadly, well, I have a choice. I can talk about weight loss, which is relevant, but I don't love to put all my eggs in that basket. I could talk about general health, which is not always compelling, or I can speak about liver health. And now the liver the health of the liver is compromised in a third of the population or more, you know, as it relates to fatty liver. So it just seems like a great proxy for me to send a positive message where people are compelled to listen and act. So that is the reason primarily, and there are others, but that's the really big reason why I've chosen to specialize on liver health. Mhmm. Yeah. And I guess in the modern world, there's just a lot more things that, impose more stress on the liver. So, like, all these different environmental toxins, chemicals, bad diet, alcohol. So, yeah, I guess more and more people's livers are, overburdened. Yeah. Theoretically, that's absolutely true. I mean, we're exposed to more and more objects in the air, in our food, and elsewhere. And so the importance of the choices we make around lifestyle, diet, exercise supplementation, It's not to say that those choices, the the the relevance is changes or the nature of them changes, but they're more important because the stakes are higher. So I think that's fair to say. So maybe we can start with, something like that is, I guess, more general. So, what would be something that people kind of should do as a foundation in the twenty first century to, you know, keep their liver healthy? And I guess, maybe we can also backtrack of, you you know, what happens if you don't have your liver health optimal. Like, what what other, like, diseases, can you get? And, do actually people die to, like, poor liver health? Yeah. It's a great question. So let me start with the the second question first. So just last month, a study was published in a, you know, reputable cancer cancer journal, and, it found that fatty liver disease is now the number one cause of liver cancer in Sweden specifically. Now I would expect that as more data becomes available in the years, months ahead, that this will become a more abundant finding. Okay? Now having spoken to doctors in this area, they expect that fatty liver disease, for example, will become the number one reason for liver transplant and so on. So the stakes are high insofar as if you don't take care of your liver health in the long term, you know, you can get cirrhosis, you can get liver cancer, etcetera. But if you get, like, a fatty liver diagnosis, it's not urgent in the short term. Now part of your question is what happens in the medium term, which is between when you first get a diagnosis and between when really bad things happen. And that's a bit of a gray area. And the reason why is the number one symptom of fatty liver generally is fatigue, right, Which is a very general symptom, which can occur for a variety of reasons. Right? So it's not as if, like, you can you can have multiple reasons why you're tired and fatty liver could contribute to that. Mhmm. But more interestingly, and this is actually the hard part is we don't know how does, like, slight malfunction in the liver manifest in terms of your daily life. One example I can give you is that what happens is when someone ends up with a fatty liver, which is the most common thing to go wrong with the human liver. Right? It affects one in three people globally. It will affect, four in ten by 2050, I believe is the estimate. What happens is if that goes unresolved, then the liver can accumulate scar tissue, right, which is known as fibrosis, and it becomes more stiff. When that happens, blood does not flow as well through the liver, which means that the detoxifying cells in the liver may be less likely to access that blood that's flowing through, which means theoretically, more stuff is getting through your liver undetected. Right? And so there could be the cumulative effect of that in terms of how that affects inflammation and your other body cells exposure to toxins, but that's very hard to quantify if we're being honest about it. Right? Mhmm. Right. So yeah. And so to the other point, and there's a lot of things I could say here, but if I had to give one quick piece of advice before elaborating, I would say really pay attention to the foods that influence your gut bacteria because as I said, that the blood throws through the digestive tract, it goes to the liver next. So the state of the gut microbiome has a big role to play in the state of the liver as a result. Right. Can you, like, reverse that cirrhosis and the scarring? So the easy answer I would give is the worse it gets, the harder it is to reverse. And I think that's a fair statement because that is the case for the vast majority of health conditions. But insofar as can you reverse fatty liver disease, can you reduce the amount of fat content in your liver? Absolutely. Can you reduce the amount of scar in your liver? Absolutely. Will that be harder to do the further along it gets? Also, absolutely. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. Makes sense. And and, like, why does the fat accumulate in the liver? What is, like is there anything specific about it, or, is there something, I guess, uniquely damaging about it as well? Yeah. So there's a few different ways that we could look at this. The first is, you know, with any health condition, there's always a temptation to pick one item and to say, this is it. This causes the problem. Right? And for fatty liver disease, the item that comes up generally is fructose and specifically high fructose corn syrup. Right? And so you'll you'll see there's this there's the charts. Right? The ecological data, fructose consumption goes up, fatty liver disease goes up. And, of course, there's limitations to comparisons of that nature. But what scientists believe is that and so high fructose corn syrup is found mostly in, in North America, especially in pop, for the most part. Sugar like, sugar sweetened beverages, energy drinks, and pop. Right? So scientists speculate that fructose well, first of all, they know fructose is metabolized in the liver, so it's unique, and fructose may also negatively influence the gut microbiome. Right? So and and that's a great connector of what I said so far. But I will also say that the idea that pop alone, like, if you let's just say I drink three cans of of soda pop a day, but, otherwise, I'm doing everything perfect in my life. Probably, I'm not a candidate for fatty liver. Mhmm. Right? Realistically speaking, fatty liver essentially, it's a manifestation, which is, let's say, 33% of it is genetic. Right? So it's not hugely genetic and it's not and genetics are not irrelevant, but just a manifestation of kind of less than optimal choices accumulating. And it just so happened it manifested by fat being stored in your liver. Like, you know, the accumulation of, like, less than optimal choices around diet and lifestyle, they manifest in different people in different ways. Right? Fatty liver is one of those ways. It's an increasingly common way, and it's also because our understanding and our ability to measure it has gone up, of course. Right? So that also affects things in terms of how we observe it. But the easiest way to put it is it's just a sign that internally, things are not working as well as they should be because fat is not supposed to be stored in your liver. It's supposed to be stored elsewhere or used for other things. Right. Is there, like, a certain amount? Is is it, like, synonymous with the visceral fat, the fat in the liver? It so, yes. Essentially, I think that's a reasonable comparison. I mean, the extent to which they correlate, hard hard to say precisely, but I think that's a reasonable a reasonable correlation to say that visceral fat and liver fat are related to a certain extent. Now, generally, when you wanna put a number on it, 5% is the threshold number. Okay? Now it's very important for for people to hear this. Now the human liver that's Exactly. Okay. So the human liver weighs three pounds. Okay? Approximately. So if 5% of that or more is representative of fat, you can have a fatty liver diagnosis. So that is point one five pounds. It's not it's not and and in kilos, well, my mental math is poor. It's not a lot of kilos either. Right? So we're not talking it's this mound of fat. It's very small amount. Right? So it's so it's just that these small details, but what happens is that small amount of fat over time can grow larger, lead to inflammation, lead to scarring, and that's where the issues arise. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. So the visceral fat is also, like, around the other organs, pancreas and, muscle, intramuscular, etcetera. So the visceral fat is usually quantified throughout the entire body, and the liver can be part of that. But the liver fat is specifically just the liver. Yeah. The liver liver fat imaging is distinct from other imaging and other estimations. Absolutely. Before I continue on, I'll briefly mention to you about one of my favorite longevity gadgets, which is the point charge infrared sauna blanket. It's a cheaper and more convenient way to take the sauna anywhere at any time. I've talked a lot about the benefits of regular sauna use. I believe taking a sauna regularly is the second best thing for your longevity after exercise. In fact, the sauna mimics a lot of the health benefits of exercise. The sauna is also effective for excreting heavy metals and other chemicals we're exposed to on a daily basis. The Bond Charge infrared blanket is made of pure leather and it's low in EMF. It's got a rating of 4.9 out of five based on a 176 reviews, which is crazy. But I'm not surprised because I'm using the blanket almost every day and it gets the same job done as a regular sauna. Plus, it's easy to clean, and you can store it under your bed. Alright. Back to the video. And, yeah, like, what are, like, some of the, like, you know, key things that determine the liver fat? Obviously, you mentioned fructose, but you also alluded that if you are, you know, otherwise healthy and you're only drinking soda and, everything else is good, then you're not necessarily going to increase liver fat. So, yeah, like, what is, like I guess, like, the calorie intake is also, like, just one of the biggest determinants then. Yeah. There's a lot there. Right? So for sure, I mean, individuals who are at a higher body weight, you know, all else equal, they could be at slightly higher risk. Why is that? I mean, insulin resistance plays a massive role. Insulin resistance is a universal feature, essentially, a fatty liver, which is to say pretty much everyone who has a fatty liver has insulin resistance to some extent. Right? And the simple reason why this is the case is that most people, when they think of insulin, they think insulin reduces the amount of sugar in my blood, like, to oversimplify it. But insulin also reduces the amount of fat flowing in the bloodstream. Right. So and and it's oversimplification, but still true. The more fat that's flowing around the bloodstream in the form of free fatty acids that's not supposed to be there, the more likely it'll be inappropriately stored. Right? So some of the let's say the hallmarks of fatty liver are insulin resistance, high triglycerides, which is one way to think of blood fats. Right? Inflammation and then gut microbiome imbalances, which I mentioned earlier. Now there's different ways people can arrive in those states. Like, for example, a history of antibiotic use is a risk factor for fatty liver disease. And the reason why is because of the strong connection between the microbiome and the liver. But there's different ways in terms of the precise choices people make that they can end up with high triglycerides and insulin resistance, but almost all of those ways are due to, you know, inadequacies in the diet. Now there's also different dietary strategies that can be used to resolve fatty liver. So it's hard to say exactly how someone ends up there, but there there'll definitely be patterns. Right? Inadequate protein intake, lack lack of diversity in protein, lack of anti inflammatory, antioxidant compounds in the diet, and so on. Mhmm. Yeah. It's like, you know, some people are obese because of eating too much sugar, others are obese because of eating too much fat. But, you know, there's, like, no single diet that everyone who is overweight or has a fatty liver follows. They all have, you know, different diets. But, yeah, like you said, they will develop insulin resistance or hypertriglycerhemia that leads to liver fat accumulation. Mhmm. Essentially. Yep. Right. And and I guess, like, the resolving that would also be, you know, the opposite of that that you lower triglycerides, lower insulin resistance, lower inflammation Yep. And lose weight. Yeah. Essentially. And let let's just talk about that last part for a second. The lose weight part. I mean, the most conventional guidance that someone will receive if they've been diagnosed with a fatty liver and they have a limited interaction with the health care provider is to lose weight. Mhmm. But, really, when a doctor tells you to lose weight, what they're really saying is optimize your diet, move your body more, maybe consider strategic supplementation. Right? And you very likely will lose some weight if you do those things, but it's really, I mean, hard to attribute to what extent each of these things influences, but a massive part of that influence is the diet itself. And why do I say that? It's because there's ample evidence that dietary changes and physical activity in the absence of significant weight loss reduce liver fat content. Mhmm. And the only reason that's very important to say is because I work with a lot of people in this area, and not everyone has the capability to lose a significant amount of weight. Whether the calorie restriction is too unpleasant, they don't have the ability to expend much energy physically up because of their age or their physical their status. Right? So for those individuals, they need to hear that you can optimize your diet, do smart things with your supplements, and, hey, hey, even walk a hundred fifty minutes a week, and you can significantly reduce your liver fat content and reverse the condition. You don't necessarily need to lose 30 kilos. But if you want to, you have every right to try, hopefully, with the help help of a professional. Mhmm. Yeah. So what I like some of these, dietary changes that will improve liver fat even without weight loss? Yeah. Great question. If I had to put an umbrella term on it, and I'm gonna go into the specifics, I would call it a high polyphenol Mediterranean diet that would be curated for the individual, which is which is kind of obvious. I mean, not everyone likes every food that exists that's good, so you have to find what what someone enjoys. So a high polyphenol Mediterranean diet is what I would say. Now what does that mean? Well, the Mediterranean diet at baseline is pretty much asking you to, hey. Listen. You probably when I say you, I mean the general public. You probably don't eat many nuts in your diet right now. You probably don't eat many legumes, like lentils and chickpeas, kidney beans. You probably don't have much diversity in your protein intake, which is to say most people consume a lot of red meat and chicken, and that's all good. That's fine. But they don't consume a lot of fish. Right? Now if we wanna make a connection here, the omega three fatty acids, EPA and DHA found in fish are quite effective at lowering triglycerides as are nuts. Right? So, I mean, they're directly related to the biomarkers of fatty liver, but then their their benefit goes beyond that. Now the word polyphenol is also important. So polyphenols are a group of compounds. They're not vitamins and they're not minerals, so they're not essential in that way, but they are antioxidant, anti inflammatory compounds that we see time and time again. When their intake is higher, metabolic health is better. One of the reasons for this, besides the fact they're anti inflammatory and they have antioxidant capability, is that your gut microbiome quite enjoys them. They have a prebiotic effect on your gut bacteria. Right? So from there, right, there was quite a famous study done in, in 2021, and what they did is they gave people the fatty liver a Mediterranean diet or high polyphenol Mediterranean diet. It was on the gut journal in 2021 if my memory serves me. K? What they found is that the high polyphenol Mediterranean diet was significantly better at reducing liver fat content. Right? Now the thing is polyphenols are found in very specific foods in high amounts. For example, all vegetables have some polyphenols, but artichoke has by far the most. All fruits have some polyphenols, but blueberries have by far the most. Right? Nuts have some polyphenols, but pecans and hazelnuts and almonds and ground flaxseed have the most. So you you you someone could stumble upon a high polyphenol diet, but they could easily not as well. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. That makes sense. And, like, coffee, teas, those, olive oil, those are all high? Yes. Coffee, absolutely. Green tea, absolutely. I mean, there there's abundant observational evidence right now that coffee drinking I have have a coffee in front of me. Three cups a day on average slows the progression of fatty liver disease, which is to say that coffee drinkers who have a fatty liver, generally, they show less liver stiffness, left less fibrosis. Right? And that is due to the high polyphenol content and generally just the massively high antioxidant content of coffee. And if you take the average person with a average diet, coffee drinking is a massive hack because it's for no effort at all. We are greatly increasing your exposure to these compounds. Right. What about the sugar? Would it be the case that if, you're not gaining weight, but you're eating sugar, would it still increase liver fat and the same with, like, the high fructose corn syrup as well? Well, then you get into really fine details in terms of the context and and the average output. Right? Because, like I said I mean, like I said earlier, you know, so I I gave the kind of rudimentary example. If you drink three pops a day, but everything else is perfect, you're probably going to still be able to reverse fatty liver disease. But I suppose it depends how perfect everything else is. It depends on a lot of individual factors, like what's an individual's caloric needs, how good is good, because there's different levels with nutrition. Right? And the clearest example is you could you could apply a Mediterranean diet poorly, You could apply it well. You can do a high polyphenol Mediterranean diet, and these are just three complete different levels of eating. Right? And but the reality is most people doing a Mediterranean diet poorly or eating like, what I should say is, you know, I I think the term, like, Mediterranean diet is limited. It's just a vision for for pointing out what you're probably not doing enough of and that you should do more. It has limitations. Like, for example, Mediterranean diet says not to eat yogurt, but yogurt is a great facilitator for berries and nuts. Right? And we have ample evidence that yogurt, which influences the gut microbiome, actually helps the fatty liver. So I'm not a I'm not a Mediterranean diet, you know, blindfold, go all in on that, curated for the curated for individuals and and and new science. Mhmm. But it is really tough. I mean, to say you to say you you can eat sugar and reverse fatty liver, but it really just depends on what it is that you're doing and the totality of what you're doing. Right. Yeah. And it depends on, you know, how serious it is. Probably, you can prevent prevent getting it if everything is kind of moderate and, you're generally healthy, and you don't go overboard with it. But, once you got it, then it's gonna be a bit harder. For sure. I mean, the more issues that you've accumulated, I think the more serious you have to be to resolve them. You know. Right. But fatty liver is a a condition where there's multiple levels, you know. You could have 6% of your fat being of your liver being consumed the fat, which is quite mild, and you could probably reverse that within three months. But then you could also have 60 or 70%, right, you know, consumed by fat. That could take you eighteen months. Right? And the thing is, all of this stuff is contingent on a high level of implementation, and it's very hard to assume the average person is gonna go flip a switch and then do my vision for a perfect diet. It's not really reasonable. So there's a lot of nuance there as well. Right. If you're, like, a healthy does does a healthy liver have then, like, zero fat, or is it, like, is there some, like, 1% or 2%? Is it is it, like, normal? Yeah. I would say one, two, three percent in in the context of other markers of your health being fine is pretty innocuous. You know, that amount, and there's different ways to to to get the liver imaging. Like, that amount may not even be detectable on a on on some imaging test. Right? There there's something called the FibroScan, which is the best imaging we have, but some people will get ultrasounds, which can look can see liver fat, but they cannot quantify it as well as, let's say, a FibroScan can. So it just and but FibroScan technology is not as abundantly available as ultrasound technology. Right? Those also those kind of factors play a role as well. Yeah. Is the MRI, like, better, or, is it more accurate? MRI is very accurate. However, it is you know, it's a very you know, it's a ex expensive, elusive piece of technology. So even in studies, okay, they may have MRI, but I don't know too many people who are getting MRIs for their liver. That's the reality, in in the context of limited resources. Yeah. Yeah. And quick quicker and easier with a FibroScan then? I've had a FibroScan personally. It's it's it's very, very quick and easy. Yeah. And and the and the output is fascinating because it measures liver fat and liver stiffness, which is related to the scarring. How, how much does it cost and where can people use you to get it? Like, which physician do they need to visit? So, I mean, I think it'll depend a lot on geography. So here in Toronto where I'm at, you're looking at, I think, a 125 Canadian dollars for one scan. Okay? Which is, you know, that's cheaper than it's to see me privately for sure. Right? So it's not incredibly expensive. And I think with a FibroScan, the reality is you get one, you change your life, and you get another one three to six months. You know? It's not like something you gotta be checking in constantly. Because once you have the vision right, you're doing the right things, you're okay. Now what we can also what we can also do is we can talk about what if somebody has no access to a FibroScan because not everywhere has a lot and not everyone can get one. What I would say is there's blood work you wanna look at. Okay? So let's just say we have an individual who has high triglycerides, low HDL, which is, you know, the quote, unquote, good cholesterol, high Apo b, which is a a marker of cardiometabolic health. When Apo b is high, triglycerides are high, and HDL is low, we have a very high level of confidence that things are not going well in the liver. So if you improve all those markers in the right direction, in the absence of imaging, the reverse is true. You can actually be quite confident that things are getting better in your liver. Mhmm. And those markers together are more valuable than looking at one or two liver enzymes, which is a mistake people make. Mhmm. Liver enzymes take time to change, and they don't always accurately reflect what's going on in the liver. Clearest example of this is I've seen a study, it was in the diabetes care journal, twelve months, 50% reduction in liver fat, liver enzymes did not change. So, you know, the smartest people, the smartest guidelines, they don't tell you to put all your eggs in the liver enzyme basket for those reasons. Mhmm. Yeah. And I got I've also seen that exercise can raise liver enzymes, right, because of the intensity, especially lifting weights. Yeah. It it it depend for sure. It depends on the context. I mean, even milk thistle, which is, like, a famous supplement in the world of, fatty liver, and some people actually raises liver enzymes. It doesn't lower them universally. Mhmm. So so, yeah, there there's there's variables there. They're just not a use they're not a useful as a marker because they just don't accurately reflect what we're looking to reflect. Gotcha. And is, like, the waist circumference, like, any any good estimate as well of, some liver fat? So it is. There is a calculation. It's called the fatty liver index. And the fatty liver index takes into consideration waist circumference. It takes into consideration triglycerides. It also takes into consideration one of the liver enzymes. So this is actually a a good segue. So the liver enzyme it takes into consideration is not AST or ALT, which are more talked about. It's GGT. So if one was to value any liver enzyme, GGT is the most predictive. So I would also put that out there. Okay. Gotcha. And the rest of them are, AST, ALT, ASP? ALP. ALP. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Those are the ones that you'll most likely find in, in blood work. Yep. Gotcha. What about alcohol? So that's, you know, quite notoriously known to be bad for your liver. How does it affect liver health and liver fat? So there are I mean, with fatty liver as a condition, there is different types. Right? The much more common type is the type that's not to do with, you know, alcohol abuse. Right? So that's why I mean, it's old terminology, but I still it's called nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. There is new terminology, but I think it's too scientific and the average person has never heard the terms before, so I don't use it yet. Maybe in the future, I will. So, you know, to be diagnosed with a fatty liver for metabolic reasons, what they generally do is they rule out the fact that you haven't been drinking 20 alcoholic drinks a week because that ends you up which is a very large number in which, to be fair, does is not really representative of most people, right, which is why alcoholic liver disease is not the hottest topic. It's for a subset of the population, it's relevant. But, yeah, it's safe to say that if you have a fatty liver, and really for any purpose, as we know, as guidelines continuously get revised that, you know, alcohol is the quintessential example that less is more. Right? As little as possible for optimal long term health. So I think it's reasonable advice for anyone to to reduce the alcohol intake if they can, particularly if they're concerned about liver health. But, you know, again, it's kinda it's kinda the same thing with the pop. Like, you could drink seven drinks a week, which now in in Canadian regulations is is not advisable. Right? But have and be doing perfect elsewhere, you're not getting fatty liver from that. Right? So Right. Is there also any difference between that type of alcohol and the the strength? So there's, like, vodka or pure spirits worse or better than, like, cocktails? Well, generally, if you have I mean, I suppose it depends on the individual and how they, interact with those beverages. Right? Because all else equal, if you have a a standard drink, you are being exposed to the same amount of alcohol in grams. So it really depends. Like, if someone if they have a beer, they don't like beer and they just they have one and they're good, but if they have a gin and tonic and they suck four down because they taste good, you know, I think that is relevant. But Right. I wouldn't say beyond that. I mean, beer has a very high glycemic index, so maybe there's extra I mean, potentially, if someone already has problems with blood sugar regulation, there's extra, you know, less than optimal things. Like, I think the glycemic index of beer is the same as white bread. It's a 100. Mhmm. There are different types of beer, of course. But Right. What about wine? Like, it has these polyphenols. Like, could it, like, counteract the alcohol? Yeah. I think that the poll I I don't think so. I think that there's too many other foods where you can get polyphenols from that, you know look. If wine was the only food that contained polyphenols and polyphenols were very beneficial, maybe it's a different conversation. But there's too many other ways that you can optimize your polyphenol intake. And I think the cost benefit for wine generally does not go does not trend towards benefit. Mhmm. Right. I think I don't I'm I'm not sure, but I would imagine that the French or Spanish people probably have, like, lower rates of, fatty liver and nonalcoholic fatty liver or if I'm not mistaken. Yeah. It's it's it's it's gonna be lower, you know, to some extent than North America, but there's, you know, there's so many differences. And we talk about Mediterranean diet, pattern of eating. I mean, that's probably the most the most obvious, I suppose. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. So, yeah, you're not gonna be no no point in trying to get the polyphenols from wine. Maybe a little bit, but, not a lot. I personally never told someone to do yeah. There's something about that guidance that I wouldn't I I personally wouldn't wouldn't feel comfortable. Yeah. Yeah. What about, like, like, these different types of fats? So, omega threes, PUFAs, saturated fat, etcetera. Yeah. No. It's a great question, and it's something that I've been I've been exploring for the last several years, but even more so actually last few weeks. So we have to go through these one at a time because there's different types here. So first of all, omega three fatty acids and particularly EPA and DHA. So we have to start by understanding these are only found in fatty fish, salmon, sardines, trout, herring, mackerel, perhaps some different types in other geographical geographical locations, but those are the usual suspects. So people who have a higher exposure to omega threes have a lower risk of fatty liver. When an individual with a fatty liver increases their omega thirty intake, liver fat levels go down. Now why is this? Now, also, if we have v any vegans or vegetarians, you can supplement EPA and DHA from algae based supplements. So it's not as if it's only for people who eat fish. And many people do not like fish. That's also a reality because I talk to people all the time what they eat. Whatever the reason is, their partner doesn't like the smell. They can't bring it to the office because of the smell. It's too expensive. All good. You don't need to eat it, but you have to supplement it. So omega threes definitely help with insulin sensitivity, definitely are anti inflammatory, and they definitely help with fat metabolism. Now fat metabolism is a super broad term, but the easiest way for me to put it is that it means when fat metabolism is optimal and one way to help optimize this through eating omega threes, it basically means your body is doing with fats what it should be doing. So being stored in the liver is not what it should be doing. Being used for energy stored elsewhere for hormone production is what it should be doing. Right? So omega threes help to correct that balance, And I've actually I've seen evidence that people with a fatty liver actually have less omega three less omega three fats implanted in their liver cell membranes. So that's also a fascinating finding. Okay? So that's one. Then you get into monounsaturated fats. Right? Again, they are very monounsaturated fat intake goes up. Assuming it's not in a massive calorie excess, then liver fat goes down. If you're consuming two two thousand extra calories gaining weight, it may not be the case that that happens. And there's actually and I'll talk there's a study I I I encountered the other day, but I'll talk about that in a moment. So monounsaturated fat. What is that? Avocado, nuts, olives, and olive oil. Right? So, again, great example of the Mediterranean diet. Most people don't view nuts as foods to be consumed regularly. I think if you, you know, if you tell someone, hey. I eat broccoli once a week. That's my vegetable for the week. Inherently, most people are gonna know that's not quite right. You know? I mean, this day and age, of course, you know, things are evolving in terms of how some people think, but let's just go go with the traditional guidance. But if you tell someone you have nuts on a Monday and Friday, good for you. Right? So I think there's a gap there in people's, perceived value of these foods. And and not to mention the fact nuts have magnesium, vitamin e, polyphenols, and so on. So monounsaturated fats lower liver fat, lower insulin resistance. Okay? And then you get, you know, PUFAs, the omega the omega sixes and, like, the seed oils. So here's the thing. Okay? In studies that compare saturated fats with PUFAs, on liver fat specifically, which is my outcome of interest, PUFAs are like, so sunflower oil has been demonstrated in human trials to be superior to butter in terms of its effect on reducing liver fat. Right? People can talk about other things, all good. But if if we're talking about the outcome of liver fat in terms of human evidence that we have, PUFAs are superior. But monounsaturated fats and omega threes are the pinnacle. That's where energy should be spent, you know. And I'm not here to tell someone not to eat red meat or not to use use butter or whatever the case may be. But objectively speaking, if your concern is liver fat content and the health of your liver, I I don't see the argument, for example, that butter would be superior to olive oil to cook with. It's just it's not it's certainly not based on human evidence. Yeah. Yeah. And it's the same example of your pop example that, you know, if you're, you know, only eating butter and red meat, for example, which a lot of people are, they're excluding all the other things, then, you know, chances are you're okay still granted you're not, you know, eating, I don't know, 10,000, five 1,500,000 calories or something like that. So, yeah, like, it's it depends on the context again. Like, there's ways people can, manage around it the same way people can, you know, drink pop and do not get fatty liver. Yep. Exactly right. There's all these things that you could take liberties in, but if you take liberties at every opportunity, you're right. I mean, that's a problem in of itself, but also it's a problem because it displaces the other foods that are important. Right? So that's absolutely correct. Yeah. And, yeah, I guess, yeah, the the studies are if all things are equal, like, if the color intakes are the same and they're Yes. Controlling all the variables, that's the way you do, like, a study to see, okay, which of these in specific, I guess, ingredients, influence the outcome. Yeah. Well, let let me let me give you a more precise example. So the study that I'm referring to that I was discussing on my social media the other day, I think there's a 2018 study, I believe, out of the diabetes care journal. What they did is they overfed people either saturated fat or monounsaturated fat. Right? So overfeeding means all else equal, they give them a thousand more calories. Okay? Yeah. The saturated fat which came from butter, primarily, k, that led to a 55% increase in liver fat content, and it also led to reduction sorry, increase in insulin resistance. The model unsaturated fat from pecans and olive oil led to only a 15% increase in liver fat. Now remember, the context is overfeeding by thousand calories, so we're not necessarily expecting a great outcome, and it led to no negative influence on on insulin resistance. Right? So if we did a swap study, I would expect the monounsaturated fat outcome would be great. Right? Because it was an excess, it obviously skews a little bit what the outcome is. Yeah. Yeah. I guess it also matters, yeah, what you replace it with. So, in a in a lot of these heart disease studies as well, if you replace, you know, sugar, sweetened beverages, and, refined grains with butter, you do better. But, but if you replace, you know, omega three fats and monounsaturated fats with butter, you do better than the butter. So there's, like, you know, cuts to it. So the best is, like, omega threes and monounsaturated fats, and I guess, some of these, you know, nuts and seeds. 100%. And I I look at nutrition as a game of averages and also a game of balance. So, you know, other message I would offer people is to think about, you know, what you've consumed most up to this point in your life. Right? Like, specifically speaking, you've likely had more butter and red meat than you've had salmon and almonds. Right? And that's what and, you know, it's not to say that's the blame for where you are, but there's a balance to strike because different foods have different benefits. Right? And they expose you to different compounds. So it's not this again, it's not one thing good, one thing bad per se. It's a matter of balance. And and if you've been underexposed to one thing and overexposed to something else, then if your goal is optimizing your health, you have a balance to strike for the next phase of your life. And that's very often how I pose the, the argument, I guess. Mhmm. Yeah. What about supplements? So, there's a bunch of different supplements out there. Mhmm. And I guess, often, people can also say that, too many supplements or some some specific supplements can also damage the liver. So, yeah, maybe we can start with what supplements are, you know, healthy for the liver and help with, like, liver enzymes or liver fat. Yeah. So the two most well studied supplements for liver health and when I say liver health, I mean fatty liver because fatty liver is the thing that goes wrong with the liver, right, in the majority of cases. Or and this won't this won't be surprising based on what we've talked about. Omega three fatty acids, right, and probiotics. Now neither I mean, neither of these are essential, but if we go through things, right, if an individual does not eat fatty fish, there's no exposure DPA and DHA. So an omega three supplement in barring very unique situations where they have medications that interact with it, whatever the case may be, It's it's pretty much an obvious choice. Right? Because you're not getting exposed to that compound. That compound has a clear benefit on your body. Right? Omega threes are quite well studied. They improve markers of liver health. Probiotics, same thing. Most people or, I mean, many people with a fatty liver have an overrepresentation of their gut microbiome of less than helpful bacteria. Well, gram negative bacteria is a technical term, which are just they produce compounds that go to your liver and do damage. Not good. Right? Probiotics have a I mean, look, a probiotic alone is not gonna change your life, but probiotics help to optimize the environment in the gut so that healthier bacteria can thrive and at least have a fighting chance, especially if you feed them well with polyphenols and other compounds. Right? So probiotics and omega threes are the most well studied supplements. Now what I'll also tell you, which I forgot to mention earlier, is I've I've even seen evidence that omega threes help to lower some of the bad bacterial levels that are common in fatty liver because increasingly scientists actually believe that omega threes have a prebiotic effect, which is the fancy way to say they help your gut microbiome. So that's very interesting as well. It speaks to the interconnectedness, right, of the body. So those two stand above and beyond everything else. Okay? From there okay. So for example, there was a study in the cell journal, I believe it was, that gave people, the dried extract of a camu camu, which is an Amazonian berry, which and so what what what makes this thing unique? It's very high in polyphenols. Right? It found it modestly reduced liver fat. Now here's the thing. You give that to the average person with a low polyphenol diet, it's gonna have a meaningful benefit. But you have an individual who's eating a high polyphenol diet, there's gonna be diminishing returns. That supplement probably is not gonna do anything because you're already heavily exposed or adequately exposed to those compounds. So the best supplements are what fill in the gaps of what you're not doing. Right? I think that's that's also important. I'll be honest. Beyond that, you're gonna you can find one off studies. Hey. CoQ ten does this or turmeric does that, and maybe it helps a little bit. And what I say to the those cases is if you have an overlapping concern, like, CoQ ten might also help with migraines, might help with muscle pain off with people on statins. If you have all those three concerns, okay, it makes sense. Let's go for it. Take co q ten. Why not? High risk, low reward. But for fatty liver, per se, it's you know, the evidence isn't really there. Mhmm. Gotcha. Even milk thistle, you know, which is very popular. It doesn't have a lot of evidence. Well, so milk thistle might lower liver enzyme levels, but the only problem is we just finished going through why liver enzyme levels are not even that important. And the compound in milk thistle, the active ingredient is called silymarin. It's a lignin. And and lignins are also found in ground flaxseed, which are also high in polyphenols. So I would just say have some ground flaxseed. You know? Yeah. What about, like, berberine? That's also commonly mentioned. Yeah. I mean, berberine does help with insulin resistance, and it could have a benefit. You know, peep people have trouble with it sometimes with the digestive consequences and so on. And it's not the same as the other supplements where it fills an explicit gap. And and so it's yeah. It it's one of those things. It's not something I personally in my practice recommend just simply because I think what it offers, we can replicate through the diet strongly. You know what I mean? Right. Which is not the case with omega threes if you don't eat fish. Mhmm. Yeah. Makes sense. And the supplements that damage the liver potentially are harmful. I've seen a lot of, like, reports that certain herbal supplements, especially like the ones that might be contaminated with, you know, heavy metals or something like that, they can have negative effects on the liver. Yeah. I mean, to that, I would say, I I guess it I guess it depends. Right? Because you could you could make an argument that certain supplements, especially I don't know if they're not third party test or they're random herbal supplements are bad for the liver, but how is that gonna manifest? Are you taking this random herbal supplement for life? Are you taking it for a week? Why are you taking it in the first place? You know what I mean? So I would do, you know, do research in those areas, consult health professionals if you can, but it's it's it's hard to say that you're gonna take this one supplement. It's gonna compromise your liver health for life and that you need to be fearful of any herbal supplement that exists. But, yeah, you can find evidence of the misuse of supplement of any supplement potentially having a problem with the liver given that, given the liver's role in the body. But it's not something that, that I think is massively, relevant, but it could be relevant for some people if they're doing interesting things. Mhmm. Yeah. So let's say, for example, you're taking on an ashwagandha. That is a herb, and let's say it is purely to test that it's kinda pure. If you take Mhmm. I guess, larger amounts, I don't know, like, one thousand milligrams or something like that or above, for many months, would that have any effect on the liver fat, liver injury or, liver enzymes or anything like that? Yeah. I mean, I've not seen that broadly. I know there are cases that are reported. Right? You see cases. Right? This person, Togash, went for this period of time. But there's a few things there. I mean, there's a lot of contextual factors. Like, how's this individual's health to begin with? What else are they doing? Right? You know, how vulnerable have they made themselves to something like this as a result of their other choices? I think that's relevant. Now, also, it's also about appropriate use. Like, ashwagandha is a I see ashwagandha as a short term stress management supplement. So if you're using in a prolonged fashion, I don't believe, and I've spoke with naturopathic doctors about this, that that is the proper use. So the in improper prolonged use of any supplement theoretically can have a negative influence on your liver health for sure. So I would just say if anyone out there uses Ashwagandha, it is one of the most popular herbal supplements and everyone is stressed. I understand that it's not really intended for forever use. I mean, you have to, at some point, have other stress management tactics to offer you some benefit and maybe deep breathing exercises, which by the way, I've seen evidence of lowers cortisol levels, lowers blood sugar levels, right, in conjunction with other changes. So I think that's the bigger issue, more so to say that ashwagandha is toxic to the liver Mhmm. You know, which is not the case with short term use, proper use in an otherwise healthy person. Yeah. I've also, heard that NSAIDs, so like aspirin and, these other anti inflammatory, pharmaceuticals, they can be damaging to the liver. Yeah. I mean, there I mean, so you made a mention about the, about the liver regenerating capacity. And what I've seen in the literature is I think I think individuals who lose a lot of their liver from, like, acetaminophen, poisoning, like, taking way too much. And I'd for whatever the reason, the liver can recover from that. Right? So just to go to your point. I mean, yeah, theoretically, I mean, given the given that the liver is the detoxifying agent in the body, and to and to be fair, like, what that means, it means either it transforms something into a healthier state, which usually what it is does for drugs. Right? Drugs come into the body, liver transforms them so they're less toxic. So, yeah, if you overexpose your liver to and and NSAIDs are very common medications, which is why it comes up. Right? So, yeah, misuse of any medication is not good. That includes antibiotics. That includes painkillers, whatever the case may be. Absolutely. People need to be intimately aware of that, and the liver is only one of the many reasons why that's not good. Mhmm. Gotcha. NAC is one supplement that is also often mentioned for, like, alcohol intake and, liver health. Is there any evidence that it has benefits? In regards to in in regards to what specifically? Liver. What it what it use? Yeah. Yeah. So so in people who consume large amounts of alcohol, NAC offers some sort of, protective effect? Just generally as well for the liver. Yeah. I mean, so I've not seen that. So that that doesn't mean I can't confirm or deny that's the case. I I think that if you have, like, if you have a choice to consume less alcohol, I I don't think any supplement protects you from excessive alcohol use. I'll just say that statement. I've not seen the evidence in that area. That's one area I haven't looked into, but I will now. But I think the easy answer is there's no supplement that can protect you from prolonged overuse of alcohol. And, even if NAC offers some protection, like, whether via an antioxidant mechanism, you know, you can get that through optimization in your diet, right, and through really making a proper lifestyle change. What I'll offer in lieu of answering that question is is something interesting. So the the cells in the liver that are responsible for detoxification are called the Kupffer cells. Okay? These are the cells that do the roles that we associate with detoxification in the liver. Now physical activity, which we haven't really talked about too much, definitely helps, But, specifically, high intensity physical activity has actually been demonstrated. I believe this was a 2017 study. I think it was in the Scientific Reports journal. High intensity in interval training, not resistance training, not study state cardio, was actually shown to increase the detoxifying ability of these cells. And it also reduced liver stiffness, which is a very hard thing to do, maybe because high intensity interval training really increases heart rate and blood flow, and that that has carryover effects. And to be fair, it was only in one trial, so we'll see what more research has to say, but that's another fun finding to share. Yeah. Gotcha. Exercise then is obviously beneficial. Does it does it help with liver health irrespective of weight loss? You mentioned the blood flow. Is that one of the other mechanisms? So physical activity absolutely helps in the absence of weight loss. That's clear. Right? Now someone could do physical activity and eat well and lose weight. Of course, they can't. But the benefits of physical activity are not contingent on weight loss when it comes to reducing liver fat. Right? And again, this this should make sense to people, and this is why at the beginning, I said it's 0.1, 0.2 pounds of fat on the liver. It's not a huge amount. Right? So when you when you do physical activity, insulin resistance gets better. It activates certain proteins in the body that help with fat metabolism. And so it's that carryover effect, right, that has the that has the influence on the liver. And and what I said in regards to HIT activity is that that was some speculation on my part. And the reason why I speculate that the intensity of the blood flow may be relevant, is that when the liver is more stiff, right, blood flow is more poor, which means that, like I said, there's less access to these Kupffer cells. Right? Blood can miss them. Right? So but and we saw that only HIIT workouts increased, or decreased liver stiffness, increased the functionality of those cells. So that's why I offer that bit of speculation. I mean, I could be totally wrong. Someone who's, smarter than me might refute that, but it's just a a speculation based on the studies I've seen. Mhmm. Gotcha. Is there any difference between aerobic and resistance reading? There is in terms of how it influences different proteins in the body. So so they basically help the liver in different ways is what I would say. But beyond that, I think, like, with physical activity, there's there's different levels. Right? If you take an individual who's doing nothing, and then you you tell them to walk a 150 a week briskly, that will make a change in their liver health. If they already do that, then what's the next level? Well, you have resistance training, you have high intensity interval training, you have cardiovascular training. And, really, it comes down to what are they willing and inclined to do. I mean, you know, resistant strain has obvious benefits for healthy aging. You know, having a, you know, good heart good heart health has obvious benefits. So it's it's, like, depends on what an individual is willing to do. And, like, hit activity has unique benefits for the liver, but it's unpleasant, and not everyone has the capability to go work at 85% of their VO two max. Right? So that's another factor to consider. So it's really individualized. Mhmm. Yeah. Anything is better than nothing. But, ideally, they should do both aerobic and, resistance drink. No. And if you can't, don't underestimate walking. Right? Again, doing nothing versus walking a hundred fifty minutes a week is a massive difference. Right? So can't underestimate that. Yeah. You mentioned, stress and cortisol and often say people say that, you know, stress is also something that promotes visceral fat and liver fat. Is there any, like, differences between the type of stressors and, does it actually, like, increase your liver fat irrespective of the, let's say, calorie intake? Well, I would say irrespective of calorie intake, perhaps not. But here here's what I here's what I'll say is that stress and, you know, there's been there's been studies done on this, but when you expose someone to the amount of cortisol they might experience in a stressful situation, it actually reduces blood flow to parts of the brain that are responsible for food choice and appetite regulation. Right? So that's actually that's obviously one of the reasons why stress influences food behaviors. So I think it's very hard to disentangle stress from, from affecting food behaviors. Right? It's only, I think, many people are vulnerable to the effects of stress and food behaviors, which is which is why, you know, you see deep breathing exercises and meditation can, you know, reduce blood sugar levels and reduce cortisol levels. Right? There's obviously something there. But, I mean, the extent to which stress affects one's food and take various from person to person, I think that is where the real effect will be on the liver. I mean, someone could do you know, there are people who thrive under stressful situations in the long term. Is that better than having everything perfect and not being stressed? Maybe not. Maybe it's better not to be stressed potentially. But, it's tough. I think there's not a lot of evidence for me to make a high level claim, connecting cortisol with fatty liver. I think I would be I would be speculating. Right. So, yeah, it's more about the behavior that, stress promotes, not the innate effects of cortisol itself. Yes. And it's also it's also due to how resilient is someone to stress. Right? Because I've again, obviously, I look at a lot of studies, which is why I keep saying this. I mean, there is a, a trial where they gave people omega three supplementation, EPA and DHA for several months, and they tested the severity of the cortisol response, and it decreased following a period of EPA and DHA supplementation. So how well are you living such that you can be resilient to the effects of stress? That's also a big question to ask. Right? Yeah. In this context, then sleep, I guess, has some role as well, you know, reducing stress and managing food behavior. And, you know, there are studies that if you're in a calorie deficit but you sleep, you know, five hours, then you lose proportionally more muscle than fat compared to sleeping eight hours. So, I guess the two questions here are, again, like, you know, does a sleep duration and sleep quality affect the liver fat irrespective of the calorie intake and vice versa if you're in a calorie deficit? You know, will you lose or will you keep more liver fat if you sleep shoulder? Yeah. Yeah. No. This is a this is a great question, a very fun question. So so let's go through a few things then. Okay. So first of all, there is so scientists are increasingly interested in brain insulin sensitivity. So specifically to how sensitive the parts of the brain are to insulin. Okay? And what we see in long term studies is that people with better brain insulin sensitivity generally lose more visceral fat during a weight loss intervention. Okay? So now I'm starting to get warmer in terms of what you asked me. Now it's also the case that short sleep duration, which is to sleep less than seven hours a night, is not good for insulin resistance and insulin sensitivity. Okay? So you can kinda see the connection there. Right? You can see kinda how that could happen. Now now there's obviously poor sleep, also negative effects of the gut microbiome. So, yeah, I mean, all else equal, you you're gonna make challenges for yourself self if you don't sleep well. That's because of negative influences to the gut bacteria, negative influences on insulin resistance and insulin sensitivity. Right? And, obviously, you know, to your point, poor sleep also affects your food choices. It affects parts of the brain that are responsible for making good choices around food and appetite regulation. Now I'll offer some good news and some important news is that very often when people are not gonna get enough sleep I'm guilty of this myself. Like, if I'm not gonna get eight hours of sleep or seven hours, I'm like, you know what? If I'm gonna get six or five, I'm gonna be tired anyway. Whatever. Doesn't matter. And scientifically, that's incorrect. What I've seen evidence wise is if you sleep less than seven hours a night and less than or less than six hours a night, and you can get forty five minutes more sleep to go over the six or seven hour threshold, that change alone can protect you from the negative effects of sleep loss. So which is to say, like, you know, don't underestimate the importance of an extra forty five minutes even if you're getting less than optimal sleep. And I think people need to hear that because I think we're all guilty of of that, to some extent. But physiologically, there's a benefit for an extra forty five minutes even if you're not sleeping enough. But, yes, low sleep can destroy your insulin sensitivity. So in terms of exact correlations, the studies aren't there. I'm I'm aware of this because I'm constantly looking at the evidence. I don't see like, there's obvious evidence that poor sleep is associated with high risk of fatty liver. I mean, that's obvious. It's associated with everything bad. Right? But in terms of, like, high level refined, conclusions about that, they don't exist as far as what I've seen. Gotcha. Yeah. Yeah. And, I mean, if you're if you had, like, a bad sleep, then even short twenty minute nap can be a huge game changer even just how you feel. 100%. As much as you, can with the sleep. Yeah. Is there anything else specific that we didn't cover that, is worth mentioning when it comes to liver health and liver fat? Well, what I would say, which is something that everyone can apply, is to eat eat slowly and mindfully. Okay? Fast eating is strongly associated with insulin resistance. So that's one thing. For for individuals who eat, let's say, bowel you know, a quote unquote balanced traditional meal, which is to say they have a carbohydrate, a vegetable, and a protein, if they struggle with satiation or they struggle with insulin resistance, I could offer additional piece of guidance, which is to eat the protein and vegetables at your meal first. Now the better your diet quality is, the less important it is to do this. Because if you're eating lentils, broccoli, and salmon, you know, that's pretty much all good how you eat the meal. Right? But the more help you need, the further behind you are, in terms of catching up with your health, the more beneficial details like that will be. Mhmm. Okay? Gotcha. The only other thing I'll add, is so I consider personally legumes, which are lentils, chickpeas, kidney beans, and black beans to be the most underappreciated family of foods. Okay? They legumes have a very strong influence on the gut microbiome. Right? So if you're thinking, what can I eat that's gonna have a, you know, that science is telling me is going to improve the levels of healthy gut bacteria, which in turn is going to improve my liver health, I would think about legumes? And, people don't really appreciate their value, and they're economical. They're easy to eat. They're very satiating. All the things that someone wants when they're trying to improve metabolic health and liver health, legumes offer, you don't even need that many. Half a cup at one meal a day, a quarter cup. Even I've seen studies even a quarter cup a day reduces the insulin resistance in liver cells. So I would offer that guidance as well. And but beyond that, I think, yeah, it was a a great comprehensive, conversation. Great questions. Yeah. I I also like black beans and, like, guinea beans. They're very tasty. Yeah. Yeah. Before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and your work? Yeah. On I'd say Instagram and TikTok. So Andy v r d is my, is my handle. And, all the stuff I'm talking about today, when I talk about these studies and facts, it won't be hard to find them because I I share them openly on my social media. So, yeah, I would say those two places. Awesome. We'll put the links in the show notes. And my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or a habit that you wish you adopted sooner? Oh, wow. You know what? I would say, I became a dietitian because I needed to be I needed a dietitian when I was younger. So I wish when I was 16, instead of taking a five year convoluted path to learn what it meant to eat well, I saw a dietitian. I would have saved myself a lot of unnecessary suffering. So it's a a big props to my profession. Alright. That sounds good. Well, yeah, thanks for coming to the show. It was very insightful and, educational. And, yeah, I'll be happy to have you back in the future. Appreciate you having me on. It was a great chat. Alright. See you around. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Sim. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.