Unlike the health gurus, I'm not taking dozens of supplements every day. In fact, there are only six supplements I take every day. I'll quickly go through all of them and explain the research why me as a healthy individual would benefit from these supplements specifically and at what doses. Number one is aaxanthin which is a carotenoid you get from seafood. Azaxanthin has been seen to extend lifespan of mice by twelve percent. There are also meta analysis of randomized controlled trials showing that aaxanthin helps with inflammation and lipids, But I don't have any inflammation or high lipids in my body. The biggest reason I take azaaxanthin is because of its skin antiaging effects. Specifically, it can protect against UV radiation. Human clinical trials show that azaaxanthin supplementation improves skin antiaging and protects the skin against sun damage. A 2021 review of clinical trials saw a dose of three to six milligrams a day had benefits for photoaged skin. I take six to twelve milligrams of asexanthin every day. Mostly for the purposes of skin antiaging. Number two are omega threes. The biggest reason I take omega threes is because higher blood omega three levels are associated with lower rates of heart disease, Alzheimer's and all cause mortality. It's called the omega three index that measures the amount of DHA and EPA in your red blood cells. A low omega three index is a risk factor for early onset coronary atherosclerosis and cardiovascular death. I do have some history of heart disease in my family, so I don't wanna take any chances. And I wanna have an optimal omega three index. So what is the optimal omega three index? The optimal omega three index for the lowest risk of coronary heart disease is eight to twelve percent with below four percent being linked to higher risk. My omega three index is nine percent which is in the optimal zone And for that, I consume fish regularly as well as take an omega three supplement at a dose of one point five grams a day. Besides heart disease prevention, omega threes also have benefits on muscle growth, which is another reason I would want to take that. A 2023 meta analysis found that omega three supplements can increase muscle strength in both old and young individuals, specifically by reducing muscle inflammation. The optimal dose for omega threes is one point five grams per day, DHA and EPA combined, or up to three grams a day if you are at a higher risk of heart disease. The third supplement I take for skin and aging is collagen. Collagen is something most people would benefit from starting already in their twenties because collagen content in the skin decreases by about 10% per decade after that. Taking collagen supplements has been seen to improve skin hydration, reduce wrinkles and reverse signs of skin aging in many clinical trials including a 2023 meta analysis of 26 randomized controlled trials. The dosages in these clinical trials range from as low as two point five grams up to twelve grams per day. I take ten grams of collagen peptides every day. The fourth supplement in my stack is glycine. The biggest reason I take glycine is its potential life extension effects as shown by animal studies. Glycine has been seen to extend lifespan of mice by four to six percent. Besides that, glycine also supports skin collagen synthesis. I take around ten grams of glycine every day which might sound like a lot but for optimal collagen turnover you actually need twelve grams of glycine. And remember most people aren't getting optimal amounts of glycine. The fifth supplement is TMG or trimethyglycine. The reason I started taking TMG was to lower my homocysteine levels which if elevated can be a risk factor for heart disease. Meta analysis have shown that taking up to four grams of TMG per day for six weeks can lower blood homocysteine in healthy adults. Doses over four grams a day can increase cholesterol, but a dose below four grams a day lowers homocysteine without raising lipids. I decreased my homocysteine from twelve micromoles per liter to five point eight micromoles per liter which is in the optimal zone for the lowest risk of mortality. A homocysteine above five is linked to Alzheimer's and heart disease. To achieve that I took four grams of tmg every day but I also did hyperbaric oxygen therapy which can also lower homocysteine levels. Besides that, t m g also appears to have some benefits on exercise performance and muscle growth. However, the evidence for that is mixed and I personally haven't noticed those benefits. The last supplement is hyaluronic acid which I also take for skin antiaging. Hyaluronic acid content in the skin declines already in your twenties and it maintains skin hydration. A 75 year old person has only one quarter of the hyaluronic acid as someone who's 19. There are randomized clinical trials showing that one hundred and twenty milligrams of hyaluronic acid per day improves skin condition and decreases skin wrinkles. I take two hundred milligrams of hyaluronic acid every day. The same with fitness, taking care of skin antiaging before you actually experience serious signs of skin aging is gonna be more effective than retroactively trying to improve the condition. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices, which are the bond charge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes, they do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin anti aging, hormone optimization, pain management and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes. Especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the bond charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most rheumatoidisors don't have the right wavelengths of light, which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Boncharge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research and they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code SIEM, s I I m, for a 15% discount. In addition to those six supplements I take every day, there are also supplements I take on and off. The first one is creatine. It's notorious for its sports performance benefits but it also has benefits on memory and brain health. However, the reason I'm not taking creatine all the time is because it decreases VO to max as shown by meta analysis which is another marker linked to longevity. So, I'm taking creatine during my strength training phases and I cycle off when I'm focusing more on cardio. The second supplement is melatonin which is beneficial for improving sleep duration and quality as shown by many meta analysis. I I don't have sleep problems myself so I don't need melatonin for that reason. But, I do take melatonin occasionally because it might have some anti aging effects. Like other hormones, melatonin levels also decrease with age. This seems more speculated from my part as there's not a lot of evidence that melatonin would extend lifespan or something like that. We just don't have the data. But melatonin supplementation also lowers lipids and it also lowers inflammation. The last supplement is magnesium because it's very important for stress, sleep and metabolic health. I don't have any problems with these either but I take magnesium as a supplement just to ensure that my magnesium status is high enough. A lot of foods don't have magnesium which is why most people would benefit from occasional supplementation. The magnesium content of vegetables between nineteen forty and nineteen ninety nine has decreased by 24%. In fruit by 17%. In meat by 15. And in cheese by 26%. Mostly because of soil erosion, pesticides and food processing. So the magnesium supplement is almost like an insurance policy to make sure that I do get enough magnesium. If you want to know 15 of the most evidence based supplements that you could take then check out this video next. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click a like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is Ceeb. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.