Felt so good afterwards. I got, like, so addicted to this thought of what else do I not know that I don't know? And I really wanna feel this good all the time. I never wanna go back to feel I can't even it's like to explain how I felt was just, like, bone tired on a level that I've never experienced that kind of exhaustion before. She said I prioritize social connection over, like, a rigid schedule. Julie, welcome to the show. Thank you. Thanks for having me, Seamland. Yeah, I'm happy to have you on the show and, your video, like I made a video about you last year which, went actually quite popular and people were like really interested in, your results with the rejuvenation Olympics and, just just, your general health routines. So I'm, yeah, happy to, you know, actually have you on the show and go into all the details of, those routines and, yeah, discuss, other things like that. Yeah. Yeah. It's all, I mean, pretty basic simple stuff, you know, nothing nothing fancy going on here. So Yeah. Yeah. How did how did you, like, yourself react to, like, I guess, all the publicity or all the media attention, that, you know, you and Dave Beschow were, like, one of the most, like, I guess, sighted competitors going on there, and, people were so excited about it. Right. And, certainly, there's been, you know, new people. But, yeah, it was a little bit surprising, honestly, because I've I've just been in my bubble kinda doing my thing for years and years. And, even when, like, the first few articles by Fortune that were done, I thought, okay. Well, you know, that's that's my fifteen minutes. I'm I'm good. But then it just kept sticking and kept going. And then I kinda realized, you know, obviously, I live in America. And and, you know, to to any extent that I can motivate people to be healthier and live healthier lives, then I like, that is like, it's what I do all the time. I'm always that person with my friends kind of like, hey. You know? Did you know you could do this? Or, oh, there's this simple little thing you could switch. And so I thought, well, gosh, you know, if I could do that. So, that was kind of my reaction is, like, well, bring it on. If I can help people, then I'm gonna, you know, I'm gonna help people. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And I've I've seen you started, like, more posting more frequently on Instagram as well and, it's pretty content about it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I hope to get people kind of back in their kitchens with my YouTube channel. So that's very nascent, and I'm still really working out, like, you know, what people want content wise, what, you know, what I'm capable of producing, you know, like all of that. It's very, very, very rough right now. So, but I'm just trying to, like, you know, I watch it and I kinda go, oh god. This could be better. That could be better. I could do this better. But, I just thought, you know, just take that, like, learning mindset. You know, like, hey. Every time you do something, you're gonna get a little better and just let it be kind of public. Like, let people see that, you know, you don't just start a YouTube channel and you're good. You know, it takes a while to get it going. So Yeah. If you if you ever wanna if you would like, I think yours your quality and, like, the production is actually, like, very good for, you know, how long how short you've been doing it. If you ever wanna feel good about it, then just check out my, like, first videos on the channel. Like, eight years ago, I had, like, four eighty p camera and in a booming, dorm room with, like, super echo noise, and I was just not even paying attention to any of the production revenue and quality back then. And I just, you know, kept making YouTube videos and, you know, slowly building audience. And, of course, nowadays, if there's, like, night and day for my own production value. So, like, you're already, like, you know, in a lot of, you know, high level compared to where I started from eight years ago. I don't know. I'm a graphic designer by background. So, I, you know, like I see this stuff and I just kind of cringe, but, you know, like, the information is still there and people can get that and that's what matters, you know? So, yeah. Yeah. I'm like, you said you're, like, been doing your thing for many years. So, like, how did you, I guess, getting get started with this and what got you, like, interested in, health and longevity? Yeah. It's a slow it's like a very slow evolution over a decade. So, like, you know, I was kinda always, impressed with how, you say how food impacts us and makes a difference in how we perform. I mean, that's just kind of started when I was very, very young and I was a swimmer and, you know, I won't get into that. But quickly back in my thirties, I, was having some problems. The doctor wanted to prescribe a pill. I sort of my intuition just said, this is acid reflux. Isn't it something I'm eating? I should kind of look at that a little bit more. So I went to, a more natural doctor, a naturopath, and she put me on for the first time I had ever heard this term. Well, she asked me to get off all wheat and dairy and take some, you know, drink some teas, and that seemed to help. And then she asked me about my antidepressant that I was on. And given that that thirty six months was over, and she was asking me, well, how much do you drink? You know, like she and I was drinking at the time, like, a bottle of wine a night to myself, you know, like and sometimes finishing with whiskey. So, you know, no wonder I was depressed. No wonder I was having problems. And, she was the first person to kind of say, well, you know, maybe that's contributing to your problem. And, and then so, you know, removing that and then she said, I'm gonna put you on a nutraceutical protocol. I'd never heard that term before, but it actually worked. And, I, you know, just went cold turkey off the antidepressant, which I wouldn't recommend for the average person, but I just I'd only been on it for, like, a year and, you know, began that protocol really helped me, which was, like, l tyrosine and a few other things, but, that really worked for me. And, I'm trying to think so that was, like, thirties. And I went, like, from there forward kind of being mindful, like, oh, okay. Too much drinking isn't good for you. She'd encouraged me to get exercise. So I kind of started going back to the gym because I had always been kind of into the gym and things, but I just you know, so much stress kind of took me away from it. So, anyway, so I kinda, like, just slowly started getting myself healthy over the next decade and a half. And, I mean, I lost, like, 30 pounds, but, again, over, like, a decade and, you know, started building muscle. Then I had my son. And when he was three, I learned that I had heavy metal poisoning as it just you know, like, my hair was falling out. I was really tired. And thank God I had a friend who just said, hey. You know, you should go get checked for that. And sure enough, it was like, you know, my insurance like, my medical insurance paid for the cleanup. It was very high levels in very multiple metals. I was a ceramics major and I eat fish from, like, all over the world. And, you know, there's other other things I'm sure that contributed it too. So at any rate, when she was doing, like, the chelation therapy and all the different things she was doing, again, it just sort of like, oh, you know, nutraceuticals are are really powerful. And she said, you know, kind of did some what do you call it? Oh, my gosh. Why am I skipping the word? Your like, genetic testing. And she noticed I had the SNP for MTHFR, and she said, you know, you're probably going to have trouble detoxifying. There were a few other things in there. There was something with, like, not sodium, but sulfur was another thing that would could cause problems. So she, said, you know, you're you're gonna always be looking for ways to detox five. So at this point now, like, the Internet is a thing, so I start researching, you know, different ways to kind of everyday detox. And I find, like, doctor Richard Klinger and, you know, cilantro and all these other ways that you could safely, detoxify the body on a daily basis. And I just kind of, like, kept up that like, that research was so interesting to me, and I felt so good after the chelation therapy. I mean, that what was interesting to me is, like, how I was walking around with this low grade depression that I didn't know I had until I didn't have it. You know, it was just like, wow. Is this what the rest of the world feels like? And I was able to think clearly. I was able to just be happy on a level that I'd never experienced for, you know, since I was a child. So it was just really, really, eye opening to me and I wanted to continue down that vein. So so now fast forward another ten years and I learn about Synolytics and I was like, oh, like, you know, detoxing zombie cells. And I'm sure I've got a lot of that buildup given my background. You know, let me kind of research that. So then I find my way to, like, you know, fisetin, fyston, whatever. And I find Novos pops up on my Google search. And so then I was looking at, like, oh, they had lithium in there, which my doctor was already saying, you know, you should probably be on low, you know, low dose lithium for your just your mental health and your brain health. And there were a few other things in there that I was already reading about, calcium alpha ketoglutarate, glycine. So I was like, oh, yeah. I'm gonna try that. And and that's kinda how the whole thing started was, finding that that company. Yeah. And those products. Yeah. Yeah. It's like a different kind of rabbit hole with, you start taking some supplement or you just try to fix one thing and eventually, yeah, you're you're you're full on, like, into it with, different kind of, bio hacks and supplements and stuff like that. Yeah. Well, I think what happens is, like, people you feel like one of like, again, when I did occasion therapy, I just felt so good afterwards. I got, like, so addicted to this thought of, like, what else do I not know that I don't know? And I really wanna feel this good all the time. I never like, I never want to go back to feel I can't even it's like to explain how I felt was just like it was like bone tired on a level that I've never experienced that kind of exhaustion before. And I, you know, my regular doctor was just saying, well, because, like, my brother had died like a year before, you know, very tragically and my son was three. So it was just kind of like, well, you know, like, that's why you're tired. He's little and you're grieving. And and I just I knew something in me just said, it's just more than that. It's way more than that. And I'm so glad I kind of pushed it. But I think I think we all kind of start going down rabbit holes because we experience, like, either you have, like, some health problem and you're able to solve it and you feel better or you just feel better in general. And so then you kind of get, like, into these little rabbit holes because, you know, the regular doctor doesn't have time to study all those things or, you know, med school for whatever reason the system isn't set up. I mean, thank God for functional medicine, but, you know, I I think that's why I think we have to empower ourselves and use our intuition, and that's typically why I'm down those rabbit holes, you know. Yeah. Yeah. It's like, you know, getting a good sleep. You, might think you're feeling normal, but after you get, yeah, like, a perfect sleep, then, you feel like, wow. I'm not even tired after waking up. So, yeah, it's kind of, like, one of those things that once you, like, experience it, then it, yeah, like, opens your eyes to that this is actually what normal you'd you'd feel like. Yes. Yeah. Exactly. Exactly. The, like, resilience that you get from from that is amazing. Yeah. I wanna take a quick break to let you know that you can now get my new book, The Longevity Leap on Amazon. It contains 24 chapters ranging from the biology of aging to all the major chronic diseases such as heart disease, kidney disease, neurodegeneration, and I also cover over 70 clinically relevant biomarkers for chronic diseases and their optimal ranges. You can get the book from the link in the description. Yeah. Maybe let's get get to your, like, routines. I remember from, last year when I researched about your routines, they were, like, very simplistic and not, like, you know, very, time consuming or, like, very difficult. So, maybe, yeah, we can just go through one of the one of one one by one through these different aspects, like, you know, diet, exercise, some supplements. Yeah. Okay. Well, let's start with diet. So I make, I mean, I think if anything, like, this can be hard for people that, like, don't work out of the house or, you know, they have demanding jobs and demanding lives. But, you know, I eat a pound of vegetables a day, and half of that is greens. So that requires a bit of prep during the week you know, on the weekends. I prioritize a 100 grams of protein a day, And I don't always get it, but I only count, like, my protein rich meals. So I'm not counting protein that might be in the vegetables and coming along for the ride, you know. So I'm only counting, like, protein powders, collagen collagen and, like, meat and eggs, you know. So I try to get a 100 of that, and I figure I'm probably getting another ten to thirty along the way. I weigh a hundred and thirty pounds, so I figure I'd need a hundred to a hundred and thirty. My, how do you say my lean Mhmm. Is, like, ninety eight pounds. So Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's a good So, anyway yeah. So that's what that that's kind of the diet. I don't really say, like, no I mean, well, no alcoholic. I just can't I cannot metabolize it at all anymore. So I can't even just, like, every once in a while have something. It's just I just can't sleep. It's just an awful feeling, so I just don't do it anymore. But, I don't really say, like, no sugar or no carbs or any of that. But, I mean, after eating like a pound of vegetables a day and 100 grams of protein, there is not a lot of room for much else. You know, it's just I'm so full from that. So that's kind of how I've approached the diet more so in like, what are the healthy things to add versus, like, what are the things not to do? You know, it's just it's easier to for my brain that way. I don't feel like I'm, you know Yeah. And I think yeah. Like most Yeah. And most of the, like, benefits come from just, you know, eliminating, the the major, problems with food, like the processed food and, hyperpalatable foods. And, yeah, like, you know, there's a lot of range for a healthy diet. It's not like a very narrow path. It's very kind of broad, like anything that's pretty much whole foods, tends to be, you know, on the health direction. But but you also have, you know, a lot of, like, these, recipes that you share on Instagram and YouTube. So what are some of like your, let's say, top favorite recipes that, you know, aren't just it's just like a vegetable and meat dish? Yeah. Yeah. So I mean every every day that beet kvass, I drink that every day and I'm actually about to post another video on because I've kind of perfected a recipe that is like so good. I just I was drinking it yesterday going, oh my god. This is so good. So I'll post an update to that. I'm all about, like, these concoctions and drinks and, I think because I maybe because I live in Arizona and it's really dry. So I feel like there's just a lot of especially when it's really hot outside, you just don't feel like eating anything. So, like, there's just a lot of cold stuff. So the, you know, recipes, which I haven't posted yet, are, like, you know, like a lot of salads, like so I need to do some salad dressings for people, but, and I do a lot of the fermented veggies. I really I've really come to enjoy those. And so, of the ones I've posted, it's the fermented stuff that I probably eat every single day. I do this like, I posted a sardine recipe, and I do that probably, like, I would say every 10 days. I'm doing the sardines. I wish I did that a little more, but I I'll post another one with sardines and tuna, and and that's something I eat a little more often. But it just it depends too, like, summer and winter. Like, I'm in the winter, I don't really like eating too many cold foods, and so I'm eating more soups and, you know, that kind of stuff versus the summer. I'm eating more salads and, old meats and that kind of stuff. Gotcha. The crust Yeah. The crust is like a fermented drink. Right? Yeah. Exactly. Exactly. Yeah. And I'm gonna start experimenting with a lettuce kwas or yeah. Yeah. You're saying it properly. I don't know. That's how we say it. Yeah. I don't I don't know. I think it's I think it comes probably from Eastern Europe or something. But, yeah, like, kuas. So, like, how do you do it with, like, beetroot then? What's, like, the ingredients? Yeah. So it's just, in I take, like, a 64 ounce, which is what, like, a is that, like, a liter? No. Or is that two liters? I think that's, like, two liters. Mhmm. 64 ounce jar, I put in a pound of, cut up beets and about one to one and a half teaspoons of salt. And now I've been adding cinnamon and cloves to it, and then you cover it with water, and then you let it sit on your counter and ferment for, I do mine anywhere between two and three weeks now, and it makes this just, like, beautiful, rich, red, beet liquid. I don't know how to explain it. And then, you pour that liquid off. And then when I have it at night, I always mix it with like just like maybe one third sparkling water with it. So you could use a mineral water. I have my own bubbler down there, so I just use that. And that's kind of something I just drink like every night, like instead of a glass of wine, I'm having that. And then the beets that instead of throwing them away, I usually take about half of them and I grind them up and then I'll put that on soups and salads. So again, it's just something else that's a little bit more fermented. There was in I had read a book called Younger You by Doctor. Kara Fitzgerald, and she talks in there in her younger you program about eating like a beat a day. So I've just tried to like, slowly I'm trying to slowly move into, like, hitting that as a metric. So, like, I've got my half a pound of greens, which comes from, I think that's just really healthy for women in menopause from doctor Anna Kabayka. She talks about that. And it really helps keep your body, in this I may be in an alkaline state, but it it definitely helps me control my weight. So I just keep doing it. And I don't know if, again, if it's because I have the MTHFR and I really need those greens for that. I I really don't know, but, it's just an easy metric. And now I have my son on that too. He's he's slurping on the greens. So so, yeah, every week I always prep, about about four pounds of greens. I cook them all down. And, like, you know, once you cook them down, it's like, you know, three bites. Boom. You've had, you know, four ounces of greens. So, so yeah. It's Yeah. Beetroots is, yeah, very good. It's got, you know, the helps with the blood flow, nitric oxide. I think, like, from the younger you, so that it's based on, like, these studies that she did, Cara Fitzgerald, with, yeah, like, lowering the DNA methylation age. And, yeah, the diet was, like, you know, some some eggs, liver, leafy greens, curcumin, green tea, and, beetroot. And I think the beetroot has, like, the TMG, so trimethylglycine, that helps with the methylation. And, that might, yeah, like, you know, help with, like, some of the ageLOC results. So, yeah, I I also eat beetroot quite quite regularly, almost every day, like, cooked steamed or, as a vinaigrette or I've been trying I've been experimenting with a beetroot juice as well, which, yeah, there's some studies that it helps with VO2 max, thanks to the bot flow. So yeah. Yeah. My son's been experimenting with, he's really into bodybuilding now, and he's got he's got the beet root powder. And so he's kinda doing some of that, like, right before he goes for his workout. And he says it really helps. I mean, so I don't I haven't tried it yet. But yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So I'm trying to think, is there anything else diet wise? Like, that's kind of it. I mean, I you know, it's not too special. But I I also, like, enjoy, you know, stuff like we had. I found this great sourdough bakery this weekend. So, you know, like, I had some sourdough toast with avocado and, you know, that kind of stuff. And I do also and we can maybe tack this later, but I just did like a fasting mimicking diet, and I'm trying to do those every three to four months, you know, just this year and kind of seeing if it makes any difference. I've done a lot of fasting in the past, but never as the fasting mimicking diet, and it just makes it so easy. So how do you do it? Like, do you use the Prolon kit or do you do your own? Yeah, I'm using the Prolon kit for now, while I cut because it just makes it so easy. But I thought once I kinda get a little bit more used to doing it, I know, like, I've put it into chat GPT, like, can you help me design a, you know, fasting mimicking diet? And, you know, it came back with too much soy. I'm like, can you take that out? It's like, it's so fun what you can do with chat GPT. And then, you know, I just of course, I check it, but I thought it's gonna be too much for me to try to, like, cook all the foods. I just love that it's so easy. You know, just mentally, it's just very, very easy to do the prolon. So, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Like, there's some interesting research about the fasting way we can diet. But, yeah, it's obviously gonna be hard to know what I like if it if it has any longevity benefits or or not. You know, theoretically, you could there's also the argument that you could do what's called like the protein that was called protein sparing modified fast. Yeah. That where you're eating only protein which is kind of the opposite of the fasting mimicking diet where you're restricting the protein but, yeah, the idea that that's what bodybuilders use the protein sparing modified fast that they eat only like a thousand calories of pure protein for a week and then they refeed and they lose a bunch of, weight and theoretically maintain more muscle. Interesting. But But that, you know, the reason why the fasting mimicking diet is low in protein is because they want to like suppress the mTOR and lower the IGF-one levels which protein would raise. So like if you're doing the protein sparing modified fast are you like not really getting the health benefits of a fast from like the IGF-one standpoint but you are maintaining more muscle probably because you're eating more protein? So for a fat loss, pure fat loss perspective, the protein sparing modified fast is probably like superior but whether or not the fasting mimicking diet is better for the longevity and I two one, etcetera, that we don't know probably at the moment yet. Yeah. Do you know anything about, like, the, I know there's fat fasting, which I've done in the past too, you know, like using just kind of like avocados for the most part, you know, but I know you can do fat fasting, and I just find it it just kinda makes me feel sick. So I know I can only do so much, but I'd rather just do the water fast because really like, I might do a fat, like, a fat day the first day, and then the rest of it, I would do, like, two or three days of water fast. And Yeah. I I've heard about it, and, yeah, you could do, like, with MCT oil or bone broth or something like that. I I don't know. Like, yeah, it depends which one you like theoretically. Yeah. Like, you're not like raising insulin, you're not raising IGF-one, and you're, you know, getting some electrolytes or some nutrients to stave off the hunger. So, yeah, I think it, you know, depends why the person is doing the fast and what are they hoping to gain from it. So, you know, there's not a lot of, like, actual studies comparing these things. So, most of it is, yeah, go ahead, like, theoretical. Yeah. Yeah. So I'm trying to think if there's anything else with diet. I think that's it. You'd Do you do the, like, daily, you know, the fasting or anything like that? Yeah. Just because I just like, I've never been a breakfast eater. Like, I just, you know, my whole life, I just feel kinda sick in the morning or not sick, but just not I'm just not hungry. So, I usually don't eat till around 10:00 in the morning, and I'm because of this whole, like, now that I'm tracking my sleep, I'm noticing, like, if I don't eat dinner like, if I can eat dinner at, like, 04:00, I can usually get a little better sleep, but, or even earlier. But, it's just hard because sometimes I if my son is wants to eat dinner together being that he's 18 now and he's never here, you know, I'm always like, okay. Great. I'll, you know, eat dinner if I go out. So, I mean, I I try to say I prioritize social connection over, like, a rigid schedule. So, for the most part, though, if I'm just kinda here doing my own thing, toodling, I'll have dinner around, like, four, 04:30, and then I'm done until basically ten the next morning. But I do put that said, in my coffee or my tea in the morning, I do green tea. First thing in the morning before I go work out, I will put some collagen protein, And then I've been experimenting with this SYNBOTA, creamer that's got, like, l tyrosine and some alpha GPC in it, which I'm really, really enjoying. So I guess, technically, I'm breaking my fast, then that would be about, like, five in the morning. But, you know, I don't know. I do that. Yeah. Again, that's another one of those things people, you know, they have different opinions about it. But, yeah, I don't I think it's, not a significant thing and, not that, like, important about the coffee or, like, the milk and the coffee or tea. Yeah. Yeah. That was just kinda like Stacy Sims was talking about this. And I just noticed, like, oh, I actually feel better when I'm working out when I do that. So I might well just stick with it, you know? Yeah. Yeah. What's your, like, exercise routine then? Yeah. So exercise is different. It's kind of always evolving and changing because I just get, you know, bored, but it always includes, a v o two max, which I typically try to do on Mondays, just to, like, get it over with, and it's not bearing on my mental space. And then, and usually a sauna after that. And then, Tuesday and Wednesday. So Tuesday, I'll do, like, lower body, and then Wednesday, I'll do upper body. And on Wednesday, usually, I'll add, like, another twenty minute hit sometimes or I'll just kinda you know, maybe it's not a hit. It's just I just get on the step mill and go for twenty minutes. And then Wednesday, if I didn't do a hit that day, I'll do it on Wednesday. And there's no weights on Wednesday, but I'm working usually my core. And then, Thursday, I will go back to doing, or excuse me, Thursday. Yeah. Friday, I'll go back to doing my lower body. And then Saturday, I'm doing my upper body again. And all all but the, all but two of those are followed by a sauna. All but two days are followed by a sauna because I'm in my gym. Yeah. So I I go do my lower body. So I and I try to so, like, there's two days lower body, two days upper body, and I try to divide it so that one of those days for the lower body and one of those days for the upper body is, like, with free weights. So I'm kind of you know, I really have to work all the different balance things out and, you know, all those little small muscle muscle movements. And then the other day, I'm on machines, and I'm just trying to, like, kinda push it. I'm very, like, hyper I can hyperextend. I'm very wiggly and, and bendy. And so I I don't feel like I can lift as much as I probably can. Like, when I'm on a machine, I can really kind of push it because it's sort of holding my range of motion, versus, like, the free weights. But, I think the free weights are important too. So that's kinda how I my mentally think of it. But I'm trying to do one VO, me two max, one hit, you know, the four days of, weight lifting and then at least a minimum of four saunas a week. Mhmm. Wow. Yeah. That's a that's very good. Yeah. Like, saunas are super beneficial, and, yeah, four times is kind of the optimal amount. Yeah. Yeah. I love it. I love it. Like, that's my even in the summer here, you know, it's like, oh, how's this going in the sauna? It's like really great. Yeah. One thing I'm curious about is, like, so with with age women's, bone density declines quite rapidly. Have you ever like done a DEXA scan or something to see if, what's the like your bone density? Yeah, yeah, I did. I started a DEXA scan, gosh, two years ago. I did my first DEXA scan because I was worried about that, but no issues with my bone density. And I've actually gained just a tiny bit of bone density and gained some muscle mass too. So, I'm very, very pleased with that. I am on hormone replacement therapy, which I do think, you know, helps with that. We had to reduce it this year because I did develop a fibroid, which is I had estrogen dominance, and so I had to, like, cut my estrogen way down, which kind of put me in a mini menopause, which was horrible. And I just like, why why women don't just immediately go on hormone replacement therapy? I don't know. But, that was that was awful. But and I'm just I'll go to my my doctor here in a little bit after doing all my Dutch testing, and I think they're going to add a little bit back, but we'll see. Was the was the DXA scan before you started hormone replacement therapy or No. You already taken it? Okay. Yeah, I've been on it for, gosh, almost a decade now. I mean, I was in Dubai when I moved when I was kind of getting perimenopausal. And the the doctor that I saw there, I mean, thank God I wasn't. Thank God I wasn't seeing, like, traditional doctors in America because they would have never put me on hormone replacement therapy. But he did. And then once you're on it, like, they won't take you off of it in America. So when I came home, like, three years later, they're like, okay, you know, they continued my prescription. But, yeah, I was grateful that he did because it really helped even out the perimenopause. I didn't have to go through so much. And I, you know, I just kind of like in my head, I'm thinking, I don't know, you know, from I'm not obviously, I'm not a medical doctor, so I don't know from a medical perspective, like what's safest. But it just to me, it's like this is, you know, half of our population or, you know, a significant portion of our population. I mean, it's it's like it's, it's like it feels it's horrible. I mean, you know, you're not sleeping. It's like how to be productive. And I just think of, like, if this is our workforce, this is our, like, how what can we do? What good could we do for society if we could, like, really not eliminate perimenopause, but really help women get through that in a way that they can continue to feel resilient and healthy? That would be, like, that would be a game changer. You know? Yeah. Yeah. It's like very, you know, crazy to think about. Yeah. Like, pretty much, like, you know, for some people, slightly longer than half of their life. But for some people, like, at the middle of their life, their, you you know, hormones plummet close to zero and, yeah, like, you know, with that comes a huge risk of heart disease and, osteoporosis because of the lack of estrogen. So, yeah, like, it's from a medical standpoint it's, like, you know, very unhealthy to be, you know, after menopause with all these low estrogen hormones and stuff like that. And hormone replacement therapy, you know, as as far as I'm aware, it's, you know, pretty safe, as well. So it can be quite, yeah, like, life changing for a lot of women. But, yeah. It just means, like, on a daily basis, like, this person isn't sleeping. You know, they're up all night with hot flashes. Like, they're not sleeping. They're not their best self that then they don't feel like exercising because they haven't slept. They're just trying to, like, you know and usually what happens is you're tired, like, all day long. I remember, like, when it first came on, like, I would have to pull over by the side of the road and take, like, a ten minute nap. Like and, you know, we're talking, like, on a half hour drive. Like, you know, it just it was just too dangerous. Like, that's how tired I was. And so just I just think, like like, that's huge. You know? Like, if like, that's a a real problem for a lot of people that could be resolved. But, anyway, that's not you know? It is here to help people eat yourself. Yeah. It it would have been also interesting to see, like, if you had taken the DXA, like, before HRT, then, because I would imagine that, you know, after the menopause, your bone density dropped significantly, and then, you know, yeah, it would be interesting to see how much it had increased after you started HRT. But, yeah, like you said, you you have seen some improvement already within the last two years when you've been taking it. So, it's it's working. Yeah. So let's see. So that's really kind of exercise. I keep that pretty minimal. I'm in the gym well, because of the sauna and I shower, so I'm there. I think I I timed it before and it was like from the time I leave my house to the time I get back, it's like two and a half to two and three quarter hours. You know? So it's not too bad. You know? Yeah. I mean, considering I don't have a commute to work too. Again, I work from home. So I don't I don't think it's very bad. And that's you know, my morning shower is there too. So Yeah. Right. Yeah. What about the supplements? Yes. So supplements yeah. I don't take too many. I've you know, for years, I've been taking, a b complex, like a methylated b complex and magnesium because I'm pretty deficient in magnesium. That again, that came out when I was doing my metals testing, and it just it's still it's, like, just constant. And I don't know, you know, if it's something maybe I'm just not breaking it down properly. But, I mean, my current doctor wanted me on, like, two thousand milligrams a day or something. I was like, that's a lot. But, yeah. So magnesium, b complex, fish oil, I always or, you know, omega threes. And I divide it between, like, I do the EPA in the morning and the DHA at night. I just, like, for I don't know if it just mentally makes me feel better, but I feel like it just helps calm my brain down to have that DHA at night. So, I separate those, and I'm doing, like, a thousand milligram then a thousand milligrams in an ideal world. That's what I'm doing. I have my hormone replacement therapy, which includes DHEA, only, like, ten milligrams, progesterone, and then, bioestrogen and testosterone, just a small amount of testosterone. I'm trying to think what else do I do. I'm take oh, I know. I take d three k two first thing in the morning, which I love. I'm, again, I've just found SYNBOTICA recently, and I just, like, I love the flavor of it. So, I've been doing that. And then, what else? I do my nicotinamide riboside. I'm kind of more I lean more towards that. I I kinda go back and forth between NMN and NR, and I can't seem to tell which one is making more of a difference. So right now, I'm doing nicotinamide riboside, like, three hundred milligrams, and then I'm doing another two hundred and fifty. Is it two hundred fifty or five hundred milligrams of NMN? I'm just doing them both. Mhmm. We'll see. That's kind of what I'm experimenting with this year. And then, let's see. I oh, and then my Novos. I had to do, you know, the Novos core, which is, you know, a whole conglomeration of of things. But, you know, Feistin, als alpha, ketoglutarate, glycine. I know I'm missing a few things. Lithium. There's a and magnesium malate is in there as well, malic acid. I know I'm I'm forgetting, like, one or two things. Vitamin c, I think, glucosamine, theanine. Oh, that's it. That's it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's really nice. It's very I and I used to oh, I know. And then there's rhodiola in there. And so when I first started taking it, it was, like, really it was a bit too energizing for me, and I couldn't take it after 01:00 or it would kind of mess with my sleep. But now, I don't know if my body sort of just gotten used to the rhodiola or something, but now I take it around one or 02:00 in the afternoon, and it just kind of helps me calm down. Like, it's like right after I meditate, I take it. It just feels like it just kind of keeps me calm into the evening. I really like that. And then I experiment because, you know, we were on that podcast together and you recommended, N acetylcysteine. So I've experimented with that a little bit here and there. But right now, I, I was introduced to a, what do you call it, liposomal glutathione. So I'm taking liposomal glutathione and liposomal vitamin C first thing in the morning, because an acetyl cysteine, that's a sulfur based Yeah. Yeah. So again, it's like I kind of I just try to be careful with the sulfur stuff given what my doctor had told me. So, like, I'll do it, you know, for, like, I'll do NAC for, like, a few months and then I'll stop and, you know, kind of pulse it, I guess. And right now I'm experimenting with that glutathione. I really I noticed I started taking it during a, a Prolong Fast and or the Fasting Mimicute Diet. And it just, like, really helped me, like, come to a place where I just felt so chill even though I was, like, eating almost no food. Like, I felt like, really, the overall feeling was, like, content, and I I attribute it to that. And then I was taking oh, I know. I've also added magnesium threonate at night. So the magnesium that I take, I take all different forms. I take, like, a threonate at night. I take magnesium taurate, and I take magnesium malate during the day. So those are the three that I take. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. And, do you, like, divide them into different times of the day, or when do you take them? Yeah. So I have, like, supplements set out for, like, four times a day. And so I just, you know, even kinda evenly put them throughout there. And, yeah. But that magnesium threonate at night has also been really nice. Like, it's I can see it on my sleep scores, you know, like, making that really go up. So from I'm because my sleep scores because of, like, the estrogen that I had to drop was, like, my sleep scores are, like, 77, 78. Like, I'm happy if I can even get an 80, you know? And then I add magnesium threonate, and it's, like, 81 to 86, you know. So it's really nice. I was like, wow. Okay. This makes a difference. Yeah. Three three hundred is yellow for the brain. It's it's the most, like, bioavailable form of magnesium for the brain. And, yeah, a lot of, you know, processes in with sleep are related to brain. And, yeah, magnesium is kind of a central mineral of over there. Mhmm. Yeah. But that's that's about it. I try not I don't like taking a lot of pills. And again, like, I think it's, menopause, but it kinda just dries, you know, different mucus areas around. And so, like, taking a lot of sometimes I feel like they get stuck in my throat and I just, like, I just try to I try not to take a lot. And I figure you know, I hope that I'm getting a lot of them from the veggies. I try to get you know, I source organic and all of that good stuff. So I'm hoping I'm actually getting the the nutrients from those veggies. So so yeah. Yeah. I mean, but, you know, a lot of things you can't even get from food, like, nicotine or riboside. There's no dietary source for that. And, Glutathione. Yeah. That's not Right. Like, that's not gonna happen. Yeah. Absolutely. Absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. What what I would like your you mentioned earlier that you had, like, some effect on your family members as well. What do they think about all these, like, routines that, you're doing and supplements? Well, like, so first of all, like like, my my dad pretty much is just like, yes. Chip off the old block. Like, my dad has, like he's like I mean, you know, when you look at, like, Dave Pascoe or, like, Brian Brian Johnson's like the like, my dad's like that. Like, my dad is like the original biohacker. Like, he used to, like, have these charts on his, like, I mean, we're talking, like, nineteen eighty, you know, like, charts on the bathroom wall of, like, his blood pressure and his weight, you know, and he'd always be, like, experimenting with different supplements and, you know, and he he did these things. We call them concoctions. So it's kinda like, oh god, dad. What kind of concoction are you making up now? And now, like, I do that. Like, that's kind of a lot of my meals are are liquid meals. So, you know, I'm definitely, like, my father's daughter for sure. So he's, like, all over it. And my mom is kinda, like, not into pills. So that that's what kinda drives me to always seek out nutrition. You know, there's just the other side of me that's like, shouldn't we get this all from the food we eat? You know? And so I kinda go like, it just keeps me balanced, I think. But, yeah, like my son, I mean, I think this is the greatest testament to when you're raising kids. Like, it's not what you tell them to do. It's they'll do what you do. And I've never told him to work out. I've never, you know, in fact, like, he was never really interested in sports, and I didn't really push it, somewhat regrettably, but I didn't really push him in sports. He did a few. You know, he was in track and soccer and basketball, and he did a few on his own, but it just nothing ever really stuck. And then, he this year decided to get into weight training and full bodybuilding or, like, last year. And he's just, like, loving it. And it's it's been really cool. Like, he'll get up. I mean, nowadays, he's going to the gym after school, but he used to be getting up at, like, four and going to the gym. And I just thought, wow, this is so cool. They just do what you do. They don't you know, I've never told him to do that. So so that's been really cool. And he's, again, experimenting with supplements and, you know, he's trying to do everything it can to raise his testosterone. And mind you, he's 18. And we've been, you know, but anyway. Yeah. So and then, of course, you know, I've met friends through this. I have a really good friend who heard me on a podcast and we end up, you know, we both live here. So now we talk every day and, it's been really it's really, really nice. Yeah. A lot of great things have come from this. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Bodybuilding is like a gateway to biohacking in some ways. Like, original the first bodybuilders, you know, they're they're the original biohackers as well and, yeah, trying to, like, optimize their nutrition and attract things and those things. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. My so my dad was, so he was like I'm not gonna say little, but he was in football when he was in college and things. But so he was like you know, and he was into kinda running a little bit, but he, was an astronaut. And he was hired at a time when all the astronauts before that, like, for the Apollo missions, they were all, like, you know, the pilots. Like, they were these, like, super military stud kinda guys, you know? And then my dad was hired as a scientist with two other scientists to be on this these missions called Skylab. And I think, you know, he wanted to make sure, like, health wise, he could, like, measure up and get because they, you know, they selected 2,000 guys, and then they went through the whole process. And out of that, you know, three came out of it. And my dad was one of them. And I just I think that's where kind of the biohacking stuck. Like, he kind of wanted to make his body as optimally healthy as possible. You know? And then you just I think like any of us, when you start feeling good, you just get you get hooked on it. You know? Yeah. So yeah. Yeah. What what are your thoughts on, like are are you trying to, like, give your, you know, father who is, you know, older than you, are you trying to give him some supplements or tweak his routine or something like that to improve himself? I I yeah. I try I did give him a few, like, some Novos and a few things like that. But, my mom's not real into it. And my dad, you know, he's 87 now. He's a little little bit of dementia, you know. So I I just I kind of I'm very much of, like, let people, like, live the lives they want. And if they come to me and they want help that I like, in my immediate circle, you know, if they want help, then I then I will help them. But, otherwise, I kinda try to stay back, especially with, you know, your closer relatives. Otherwise, you can come off as I don't wanna come off as dogmatic or interfering with people's, you know, own belief systems. I think everyone has their own, you know, for like healing journey. Like, you know, people that in my family I know are suffering from certain things. It's like I might like politely say, hey, you know, you should check this out. But if they don't, like they just, you know, maybe they want to use that traditional path and that's what they feel called to do, then then that's, you know, that's their life path. Not it's not for me to to push my agenda on them. So I try to I try to stay back a little. And but yeah, my brother will call me like, Hey, what do you what do you think about this? Or I want to do this? What's up? How much should I take? You know, so I get I feel those kind of questions if I if they're asked. But yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think that that's the way to go that, not trying to force things on people because, yeah, they're not going to, you know, accept that information if they're being, like, forced or, somehow, like, judged about things. It's more, yeah, like, if they're curious and asking yourself asking themselves from you, then, they're more acceptable of, the assistance. Mhmm. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So that's that's kind of it there. What else? He asked me about diet, exercise, supplements, sleep, sleep. Sleep. You mentioned your ring. So, yeah, what's what's with sleep and sleep? Yeah. I'm I'm it's an ultra human, actually. But, I am I mean, I don't you know? I'm I'm not I'm not in love with these rings. I just feel like it's like every day, it's like, you didn't sleep enough or you didn't move enough. It's like, oh my god. Like, I can never but then it'll say, good job on this. I'm like, now you're saying nice things. Anyway, I because it doesn't seem to have, like, a a menopause setting, like because it'll say, like, you were up a lot last night. It's like, well, yeah. I had you know, like, I'm kinda going through menopause, so I, like, wake up in the middle of the night. Like, I wake up in the middle of every night. Like, I can't seem to, you know like, and it was becoming two or three times a night. Now it's kinda back down to just once a night. But, but I do I have prioritized sleep, like, kinda my whole life. Like, I'm I've always been somebody who, if I didn't sleep, I would be excessively grumpy. So I've always had to be, like, really careful about it. So even in, like and I was a swimmer too. So I had to be in the pool by, like, 05:30, before school every day. So 09:00, like, I was in bed. You know, nobody told me to go to sleep, and I would maybe go out on the weekends or, you know, that kind of stuff. But, and then so that's always been an easy priority for me, but and I do like to kinda get to bed earlier. Like, nowadays, my bedtime is anywhere between 08:30 and nine, and then I'm up between 04:30 and five depending you know, I just kinda let my body do what it needs to do. But like I said, it's, you know, because of the hormones right now. It used to be really, really restful when I was, you know, before that Rejuvenation Olympic scores, I had, like, some of the most restful sleep I was having, forever. And then because they had to kind of lower my estrogen dose, you know, it was just waking up a lot. I was hot all night. So I've had some really Like, that's been since July, pretty bad sleep, but it's kind of leveling out again now. And, and I prioritize it. You know, I do everything I can to like, get a good night's sleep. I've been trying like different products and, you know, the three and eight seems to be the best thing. But there's one other thing I'm trying, but I wanna talk about it just yet because I'm not sure. Okay. What about melatonin? Are you taking notes? Yeah. So I do, I'll do the I used to try, like you know, I used to do, like, a like, a lot of melatonin, like, over two grams. And then I was reading about it, and, I was thinking maybe that was increasing my nightly wakefulness because I would like, you know, that melatonin would wear off and then I would be wide awake. So I switched down to like a, what do you say, natural melatonin that's like point three milligrams. It's Erbitonin. And that seems to like, I still might wake up, but I'm able to go right back to sleep. So, I think that's a little better than taking such a super physiological dose, at least for me. You know, it's like it was so high that when I would wake up, I just couldn't get back to sleep. So Yeah. Like, I think melatonin is one of those things that everyone reacts differently. Like, if I, you know, I take zero point three milligrams, then, yeah, I sleep very good. If I take three, then I tend to get even a bit groggy in the morning. But, if I take you also, like, ten milligrams, then I definitely will feel a bit more groggy. So, yeah, it's the there's a lot of, individual response to that. But, yeah, like, if you look at the, like, the clinical trials, then I was actually quite surprised, but, one recent meta analysis found that four milligrams three or four hours before bed was, like, the best dose compared to two milligrams thirty minutes before bed. Interesting. So I've I've, yeah, like, been experimenting with that. And, yeah, like, if I take this even, like, you know, like, three milligrams, whatever, three hours, four hours before bed, then, you know, by the time you go to bed you're already, like, super kind of tired and, like, I'm yawning thirty minutes before bed and I can't wait to fall asleep. Whereas if I'm taking it immediately before bed then I'm not gonna actually feel it, you know, you know, it's it's gonna kick in when I'm already asleep. So there might be, like, something there with the timing that, okay, actually, a few hours before bed would make make more sense because, you know, it takes at least a few hours for your body to, like, you know, absorb it. Yeah. Do you think I mean, my my feeling is like like, I know Huberman talked about, like, it's I mean, it's a hormone. So and I I have this whole thing of, like, you know, hormones are kind of this big symphony working all together in your body. Right? So if you're throwing one of them off, you know, is that is that causing harm to the whole system? And I don't, you know, like, I don't know. Obviously, I'm not a doctor and I'm not a researcher, but that's just kind of the the thought I've taken is like you know, same thing, like, you know, insulin. If you're always spiking that insulin, like, that's just like, if you, you know, if you think of this all working together and, like, one of them is, like, playing too loudly, I don't, you know, I don't know. I mean, yeah, like, there's no actual shown, like, harm to that, and it doesn't appear to, like, suppress natural melatonin either. So because it's not like an actual hormone that you have, like, as a as a diurnal rhythm, like testosterone and estrogen and cortisol, they all, like, fluctuate depending on the time of the day, but but melatonin, it it's regulated mostly by the light, you know. If you're if it's, like, 10PM, but you're under this bright light, then you're not really producing any melatonin regardless that it's, nighttime. And, vice versa, if you're in a cave during the daytime, your body will slowly start to produce melatonin as well, so it's more about, like, the environment, it's not like that set in stone, as, like, testosterone that, like, fluctuates throughout the day regardless of, of, the light cues. But, yeah, I mean, for, yeah, like, optimal circadian balance and all these hormones, like, they work in harmony with each other, and the overarching controller of that is the circadian rhythms. So the light cues, the movement, the food, the the magnetic fields of earth, they all like affect that. And yeah, like naturally you wanna, you know, produce more melatonin in the evening, which you know in the modern world is more difficult because of the artificial lights and other things. So you just have to, like, you know, control it yourself with either supplemental metal choline or, dimming down the lights and using blue blocking glasses or using some filters on the screens and those kind of things. Mhmm. Yeah. I've noticed that if I go camping or somewhere, it's like it's so easy to sleep. You know? I think it's the the lack of light. But, yeah, I have blue blocking glasses, but they're only, like, reading glasses. So it's only, like, if I'm looking at my phone, but if I'm, like, So it's only, like, if I'm looking at my phone. But if I'm, like, looking anywhere else in the room, you know, I don't and I've heard, like, it doesn't even take very much light for, you know, you to still think it's you're awake. So Yeah. Yeah. Mhmm. Yeah. What what do you, like, pay attention to, like, blood work as well? Do you track insertion markers? Yeah. I mean, I'm tracking, like, my APOB, I track that because we have, in my family, like, strokes and heart attacks are kind of, like, on my dad's side of the family are a big deal. And then on my mom's side of the family, it's, autoimmune issues. So, I always am testing my ANA, you know, and then and I'm looking at all the card cardiovascular markers. And the only thing that's, sort of a little bit not so great is the LP little a. And I don't remember what the value is, but I just remember, like, it was like, oh, it's it's not an optimal range. You know? Like, my APOB was at, like, 61, I think. So, I think that's pretty, you know, decent. I I would like it under 60, you know, but, yeah, I'm trying to think everything else has been, like, really optimal, and I do a, like, a micronutrient panel as well. And, again, the only thing off there was magnesium. And and given how much I take in a day, it's just like how, you know, how can I not I don't know? I've gotta figure out how to optimize that. Yeah. I mean, the l p l a is very genetic. So it's, everyone has, like, different results, and a lot of it is genetically determined. So, yeah, it's hard to, like, move it with diet and exercise, although, like, a few things, can, reduce it. Like, there seems to be, like, CRP, so inflammation correlates with lp little a. And, yeah, there's not a huge huge other things that you can do to Mhmm. Unfortunately. But there are, like, some, you know, pharmaceuticals that might help with that, like, PCSK inhibitors, but they're quite quite expensive. So And I just I'm not sure they're warranted just yet. You know? Like, I kind of I'm like, well, like, my, you know, my CR everything else is in, like, like, not just optimal Western medicine, but, like, optimal from a functional medicine perspective. Everything is is pretty optimal. Things, my glucose was a little bit high, like, my fasting glucose. It used to be always, like, really good until they lowered my estrogen. So I'm attributing that to, you know, not having as much estrogen. So it's kinda changing the cellular makeup, you know, and how much I'm burning in a day and all of that. So I know that that'll work itself out. In the meantime, I'm just taking some berberine, you know, so, like, I take, like, different more supplements than maybe what is listed on my site. But it's like I'm only taking it because there is an issue or that I'm only gonna take it for a little while and then I'm gonna not take it anymore. Like, I don't necessarily wanna take berine, like, all the time, but I I I am right now until we work out what's going on with my estrogen. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. Like, the estrogen is quite central actually to a lot of, things apparently with, you know, glucose regulation and bone density and sleep and things like that. So I guess hormones are like, yeah, very underrated in in, how you feel and, how healthy you are. Yeah. Yeah. Definitely. Definitely. And I think it it it would make a difference in the pace of aging and, you know, all of those things because that pace of aging test is taking into account all those different things. So Mhmm. Yeah. Alright. I think we can start wrapping up. Before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and your work? Yeah. So, Instagram is probably the best place, but julie gibsonclark.com is my website and at julie gibson clark on Instagram and YouTube. I'm trying to post weekly on YouTube. So, right now, they're you know, and I'm open to, you know, constructive criticism and content people wanna see on there. You know, by all means, like, message me. Best to message me through Instagram. I'm on there every day, but, but you can message me through my site as well. Alright. We'll put the links in the show notes. And my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or a habit that you wish you'd have the sooner? Oh, I think prioritizing exercise every day. Actually, no. Well, it's kind of related. So I used to go on these, like, oh my gosh. I wanna lose, like, 10 pounds in eight weeks kind of thing. And once I adopted the longevity mindset of, like, oh, I'm just gonna do this the rest of my life, like, that just it was such a game changer in my whole like, my health, my well-being, how I, created habits that and that these habits have stuck. So I think I wish I would adopted that mindset, but that's you know, because what happened in the past is I would start an exercise program and then I would stop, you know, so I would do it for eight weeks and then I'd stop for eight weeks and then I'd start up again. The same thing with, like, my eating, so it was always, like, very disordered. And once I had this longevity mindset, it was like it was just, you know, stacking small habits on top of another for the rest of my life. And that's it's just been so, so calming, and, it's just been a better way to live. Yeah. That's a good advice. Well, thanks for coming to the show and, yeah, good luck with your growth on Instagram and YouTube. Like I said, you're already much more, high quality than I was eight years ago, so you grow Well, now I'm gonna go back and watch. Yeah. Well, I had to delete this. I had to delete one of the first ones, but but there are a few ones from 2018, I think, that you'll see. Yeah. Okay. Well, thank you for having me, and thanks for everybody for listening. Yeah. Please reach out with questions. I'm happy to answer. Yeah. Thank you. Thank you, and I'll see you around. Okay. Thank you. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Sim. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.