What if you had an unlimited budget and you wouldn't have to think about taking hundreds of supplements per day? What kind of a supplement stack would that be? In this video, I wanna look at what would be the world's best supplement stack if you didn't have to worry about money, how many pills you take and only focus on the proposed benefits. I'll divide this video into six sections. Longevity slash preventive health supplements, skin antiaging supplements, sleep and stress supplements, workout or exercise supplements, joint and tendon supplements, and as a bonus auxiliary supplements. Let's start with the longevity and preventive health supplements. Here are the supplements that based on human evidence could have benefits for longevity and mitigating the risk of chronic diseases. Azaxanthin, omega three fatty acids, taurine, glycine and n a c, trimethylglycine or t m g, berberine, aged garlic extract, ginger, curcumin, magnesium, vitamin k two and d three, and nicotinamide riboside, n r. I've made separate videos about pretty much all of these supplements so you can check out the specifics from the link in the description. But I'll give you a short overview of why these specific supplements are good. Azaxanthin it seemed to extend lifespan of mice by twelve percent. There are also meta analysis of randomized controlled trials showing that asteaxanthin helps with inflammation and blood lipids. Omega three supplementation has been seen to reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease events and myocardial infarction in a dose dependent manner in two twenty twenty one meta analysis of randomized controlled trials. Low blood omega three levels are measured by the omega three index and are associated with higher rates of heart disease, Alzheimer's, and all cause mortality. Taurine is another supplement that's been seen to extend lifespan in animals. Plus, there are human clinical trials showing that taurine helps with blood lipids, weight loss, blood pressure, metabolic syndrome and blood sugar levels. Glycine and NAC have both been seen to extend lifespan in mice by up to twenty four percent. In human clinical trials, glycine and n a c supplementation increases glutathione which then lowers inflammation, improves body composition, improves grip strength, and other blood markers. TMG is different from glycine and it can lower homocysteine which is a risk factor for heart disease. And it supports methylation. Berberine has been seen to lower total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, and triglycerides in clinical trials. It also improves blood sugar and hemoglobin a one c. All of which is associated with better cardiovascular disease and diabetes risk. Garlic supplements have also been seen to have blood pressure lowering, blood sugar lowering, blood cholesterol lowering, and platelet lowering effects in human studies. For cholesterol reduction, there's also red yeast rice extract that's been seen to lower cholesterol and improve other lipids. Curcumin is another supplement that's been seen to reduce markers of inflammation such as CRP, IL six, TNF alpha, and IL eight. Ginger supplementation also lowers inflammation, but it also lowers blood sugar and hemoglobin a one c. Additionally, ginger supplementation promotes weight loss, body fat loss, and reduces waist circumference. Magnesium is one of the supplements that almost everyone would need. And there are a lot of clinical trials showing that magnesium lowers inflammation, decreases blood pressure, decreases waist circumference and body weight, improves incidence sensitivity, and improves cholesterol profile. Moving on with vitamin d, a 2023 meta analysis of 80 randomized controlled trials concluded that vitamin d supplementation was associated with reduced risk of all cause mortality but not cardiovascular morbidity and cardiovascular mortality. When taking vitamin d three, it's best to combine it with vitamin k two And there are additional cardio predictive effects from k two. A 2023 meta analysis of 14 randomized controlled trials concluded a vitamin k supplementation could slow down coronary artery calcification. I also listed nicotinamide riboside into this list not because I think it's inherently superior to NMN but just because there's more human trials on NR than NMN. These human clinical trials show that NR can improve insulin sensitivity and lower inflammation. And I do think that a solid longevity supplement stack should include some sort of a NAD booster in some shape or form. Moving on with skin supplements. Azaxanthin, collagen, hyaluronic acid, niacinamide, carnosine and vitamin c. We already mentioned Azaxanthin but Azaxanthin also has skin protect effects against UV radiation and it has been seen to improve photo age skin in humans. Collagen is probably the most notorious skin antiaging supplements and it actually works. A 2023 meta analysis of 26 clinical trials saw that collagen peptides improve skin hydration, reduce wrinkles, and reverse signs of skin aging. Vitamin c is essential for initiating collagen synthesis and a good collagen supplement should have vitamin c because of that reason. There's no direct evidence that oral vitamin c supplements would reverse wrinkles but it has been shown that vitamin c and e supplementation protects the skin against UVB radiation. And it can reduce the amount of skin lesions after getting sunburned. Hyaluronic acid is also a component of the skin that maintains skin hydration, and there are randomized control trials showing that a hundred and twenty milligrams a day of hyaluronic acid improves skin condition and decreases skin wrinkles. Niacinamide is a popular ingredient in skin antiaging creams and it's been shown to improve the appearance of wrinkles and elasticity. However, oral niacinamide at a dose of five hundred milligrams twice a day for twelve months has been seen to reduce the rates of non melanoma skin cancers by twenty three percent compared to placebo. Karnosine is a dipeptide that protects against advanced glycation end products AGEs that damage the skin collagen. Karnosine supplementation has been seen to improve photo aged skin and wrinkled skin in humans. Next, we'll talk about sleep and stress supplements. Glycine, theanine, ashwagandha, rhodiola rosea, and melatonin. Glycine has been seen to improve sleep. One of the reasons for that is the increase in GABA, which is the primary inhibitory neurotransmitter for relaxation. Several randomized controlled trials have shown that glycine before bed reduces fatigue and sleepiness the next day even if your sleep is restricted. Theanine is another calming amino acid that's been seen to promote relaxation and sleep. A 2019 randomized controlled trial found that two hundred milligrams of theanine for four weeks improved stress and reduced sleep latency, sleep disturbance, and the use of sleep medications compared to placebo. Another way theanine can help with sleep is stress reduction. Speaking of stress, ashwagandha is a known anti stress herb. Two meta analysis from 2022 and 2024 show that ashwagandha can reduce stress and anxiety. However, there's also direct evidence that ashwagandha helps with sleep. This 2021 meta analysis of four random host control trials concluded that ashwagandha improves sleep in adults. As a bonus, I can add that rhodiola rosea, which is another herb, also improves stress. And it might improve sleep quality. Lastly, I add melatonin because it's one of the most known sleep supplements, and it also works. A 2021 review of 20 randomized controlled trials among people with sleep disorders found that melatonin decreased sleep disturbances while increasing total sleep time and quality. Another 2022 review added that melatonin improves sleep onset latency and total sleep time in adults with delayed sleep phase disorder but it didn't improve sleep awakening. There's also evidence that melatonin at larger doses above ten milligrams a day lowers inflammation, improves lipid profile and might improve metabolic health. Next, we have the best muscle and physical fitness supplements. Creatine, omega threes, TMG, taurine, arginine, citrulline, co q ten, rhodiola rosea, ashwagandha, and cordyceps. Creatine is the most effective muscle and performance supplement out there, and there are dozens of clinical trials showing that. I don't need to spend much more time proving that. However, you might not know that omega three supplements also increase muscle strength as shown by our 2023 meta analysis. Taurine is another supplement that can increase your physical performance. A 2018 meta analysis of 10 studies found that a dose of one to six grams of taurine a day in a single dose for up to two weeks among a range of people was able to increase endurance performance and time to exhaustion. This means that the subjects were able to run for longer before they reached exhaustion. There were no apparent differences between chronic versus acute supplementation. Another 2022 meta analysis of 15 randomized controlled trials showed that taurine supplementation improved jump performance, but had no significant effect on v o two max or rate of perceived exertion. However, another 2021 review found that out of 19 studies, in five of them taurine supplementation did improve vr2max and time to exhaustion. I would also add t m g to this list because some studies find that TMG does increase lean body mass and decrease fat mass slightly. However, in my opinion the totality of evidence suggests TMG has mixed effects on muscle mass and strength. When speaking of VO to max and cardio performance specifically, there are supplements that can improve that. Ashwagandha, a 2015 study saw that KSM sixty six ashwagandha increased the omax and quality of life in healthy athletic adults. CoQ10, a 2022 meta analysis of 13 randomized control trials sold at coq ten significantly reduces fatigue. Rhodiola rosea is another herb that has been seen to reduce fatigue and increase endurance in humans. Cordyceps are a type of mushroom that's been seen to increase VO2 max and high intensity exercise performance. For exercise performance, you have citrulline and arginine, which can both promote blood flow. Better blood flow means better workouts and better physical performance. So taking arginine and citrulline before workouts will help with results. Moving on with joint and tendon supplements. Glucosamine sulfate, MSM, chondroitin, boron, vitamin k one and k two, magnesium, vitamin d three, collagen, curcumin, and omega threes. The most notorious joint supplement is glucosamine sulfate. And yes, it actually works. A 2023 systematic review of 15 studies concluded that glucosamine reduces pain in knee osteoarthritis compared to placebo and it's well tolerated. Besides joint function, there's also observational studies finding that glucosamine supplementation is linked to up to a thirty nine percent lower risk of mortality and cardiovascular disease. The reason for that is because of glucosamine's anti inflammatory effects. MSM or methylsulfonylmethane is another sulfur compound that is often paired with glucosamine. There are clinical trials showing that MSM improves knee function in people who experience mild knee joint pain. There's even studies showing that both MSM and glucosamine sulfate can improve signs of skin aging. I would also add chondroitin sulfate to this list because it's been shown to improve knee pain slightly as shown by a 2015 Cochrane review. And like MSM and glucosamine, chondroitin also has potential skin regeneration effects. The next combo for joints would be vitamin d three, k two, k one, magnesium and boron. Not only do all of them synergize with vitamin d but they also synergize with joint health. All of the minerals are needed for bone mineral density And vitamin d status is also seen to influence the risk of hip fractures. A 2019 review concluded that k one supplementation does reduce the risk of fractures. However, that's not the only reason you would want to take vitamin k one. A 2022 randomized controlled trial on people with diabetes saw that 10 of vitamin k one per day was found to decrease the likelihood of developing new lesions in the coronary arteries and both aortic and coronary arteries. Boron is an underrated player in bone mineral density, boosting testosterone and improving vitamin d utilization. Boron lowers SHBG that will increase free testosterone. Next, we have curcumin which helps to lower pain in knee osteoarthritis as shown by a review of 10 studies. That's probably because of its anti inflammatory effects. And omega threes also relieve pain and improve joint function in osteoarthritis as shown by a meta analysis of nine clinical trials. Alright. Now I'm gonna cover a bonus category, auxiliary supplements. These supplements don't fit specifically into neither of these categories but they have complementary health benefits. Lutein, zeaxanthin, lycopene, fisetin, apigenin, quercetin, and arginine a k g. Let's start with the carotenoids lutein, zeaxanthin, and lycopene. They're great for brain health and improving eye health. Supplementing with lutein and zeaxanthin has been seen to improve visual memory, learning, and cognitive function in people with self reported cognitive complaints. A 2021 meta analysis of 46 studies saw that lutein and zeaxanthin at higher doses also helps to maintain eye health. Lycopene has anticancer effects and it might reduce the risk of prostate cancer specifically. Next, we have the senolytics quercetin, apigenin, and fisetin that help to remove senescent cells that accumulate with aging. Unfortunately, we don't have clinical trials on senolytics yet, but they will come out soon. Regardless given the other evidence, senolytics do work in lowering the amount of senescent cells which is the reason I would add them to this stack. The final supplement I wanna talk about is AKG or alpha ketoglutarate. AKG has been seen to extend lifespan in mice and it has benefits on lowering inflammation, reducing frailty, and extending health span. It has benefits on both skin health and bone health. When it comes to human trials, then AKG has been shown to help with wound healing, immunity, and faster recovery from surgeries. AKG cream has been seen to support skin hydration and barrier function. The reason I chose arginine AKG specifically is because AKG is often bound to calcium. However, calcium supplementation could increase the risk of vascular calcification, and I wouldn't want to add extra calcium to my supplement stack because of that reason. Arginine on the other hand supports nitric oxide production and blood flow which improves exercise and cardiovascular function. And arginine has even skin growth effects independent of nitric oxide. Out of all of these supplements, glycine is my favorite one. It's probably not the best and most effective one for longevity or lifespan, but it's one of the most well rounded ones. Check out what happened to me when I took mega doses of glycine for two years next.