It's a fact that some people don't like that resveratrol is the most debunked longevity molecule ever. Resveratrol does not increase lifespan in laboratory animals on average. Right now, my confidence is a 100% that you can improve your health span and likely your lifespan through lifestyle modifications. I traveled to Seattle to talk with doctor Matt Caberling, who's one of the world's leading biogerontologists and longevity researchers. He's been researching aging and lifespan for over twenty years. I asked Matt questions from my audience about different longevity protocols, supplements, and lifestyle. The first question is, so recently Brian Johnson stop stopped taking rapamycin. Yeah. What are your thoughts about that? Yeah. Well, specifically with respect to rapamycin, I mean, I think first of all, the honest answer is nobody knows whether rapamycin slows aging in humans or whether or not there are gonna be significant benefits from rapamycin. Mhmm. I don't know. Brian Johnson doesn't know. Nobody knows because we don't have randomized clinical trials yet, at least for disease present prevention health promotion. Right? They're all limited to organ transplant patients or cancer patients, things like that. So nobody knows. Brian Johnson's specific reasons as I understand them for stopping taking rapamycin. So to his personal decision, he has every right to do whatever he wants with respect to his own health. But his rationale as I understand it from what I've seen in the public domain is nonsense. Right? So he's basing it on one study that used biological age assessments that don't work. And in that same study, they found that exercise and quality diet doesn't have a positive impact on biological age. So using that as a reason to stop taking rapamycin because rapamycin also did not have a positive impact on biological age is just dumb in my view. Like, it's nonsensical. Now, you know, he's also said that some of his biomarkers may have been perturbed around lipids and glucose. That's possible. Those are side effects that are associated with rapamycin at high doses in organ transplant patients. They have not come out as significantly associated with rapamycin in people using the doses that he's reported to use or that have been used off label. So I find it unlikely because we've looked and other people have looked. I find it unlikely that rapamycin had that effect on his biomarkers, but it's possible. It's also there's no way to know for sure because he's doing, like, a 100 other things. So, again, the idea that you can attribute that to rapamycin is is not rigorous and not scientific, which is one of the many reasons I say that he does not take a scientific approach to Mhmm. To those kinds of things. So, again, I'm not suggesting anybody take rapamycin, but I also if you are taking rapamycin and you feel like it's benefiting you, I would not pay any attention to Brian Johnson would be my advice. Yeah. I guess it's like, you know, experimental, therapy for life extension. Like, we don't know if it's gonna work in humans. Obviously, it hasn't work has been shown to work in animals Absolutely. Which would be, in my opinion, like, a greater degree of certainty that it would have effects in humans than the biological age clock in that which which is Especially when the things we know work in humans didn't come out with a positive effect in that same study. Right? So, again, you know, it it it's obviously, I'm a little bit frustrated with the the fact that this gets headlines, and it's just not helpful for anyone in in my view. But, having said that, you're right. We have no idea whether rapamycin increases lifespan in people. It does in laboratory animals, and quite robustly. I think what we have learned is that it's at least some people see a reduction in chronic inflammation and, you know, at least anecdotally report benefits like reversal of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, reversal of autoimmune disease, in my own case, reversal of, inflammation of the shoulder capsule commonly known as frozen shoulder. So it hasn't risen to the level of randomized double blind placebo controlled clinical trials. It's more like a series of case reports. Mhmm. I do believe some people get benefits. I do believe some people experience side effects. The only side effect that seems, again, statistically significant is canker sores. About fifteen percent of people using rapamycin off label get canker sores. There may be a slight increase in risk of bacterial infection, although that hasn't risen to the level of statistical significance at this point. Yeah. Like, one of one of the fears I've had in the past about rapamycin is that it's uprises your immune system and makes you lose muscle. But over the last few years, that has been not turned out not to be the case, actually. Certainly, in laboratory animals, it's the opposite. Right? You can actually boost age related immune function and maintain muscle mass and prevent sarcopenia in rodents in the laboratory. And in people, again, it's anecdotal. We don't have the solid, data yet. I should say there were two fairly large clinical trials that Joan Manek did with everolimus, which is a a derivative of rapamycin. It works exactly the same way. And in both of those, they did see an improvement in vaccine response in older people. So probably, rapamycin improves immune function at least as measured by vaccine response in older people. We actually found in our study of three hundred and thirty three people using rapamycin off label, lower incidence of severe or moderate outcomes from COVID nineteen and a lower risk of symptoms associated with long COVID. No difference in risk of getting infected by COVID, but better outcomes in people using rapamycin. So I think that boost in at least antiviral immune effects is probably real. And there's a clinical trial, that I believe the data has been collected. I haven't seen it yet for, muscle function in elderly people that Brad Stanfield has gotten funded and has been running out of New Zealand. So Right. You know, we'll see. The the pearl trial from AgelessRx showed a hint of improved body composition in women at very, very low doses. So I would say if anything, the needle right now is leaning towards better outcomes in terms of of body composition and and, lean mass in people, and, certainly, that's what's seen in the rodents. Yeah. Well, that's super interesting. Next question, are more antioxidants always better? Like, there's research that, Yeah. Antioxidant supplements can actually be harmful. Yeah. So, I mean, the answer is obviously no. Right? Nothing is always in in biology or very little. It's useful to appreciate the term antioxidant is is, sort of misused. Right? So it's all relative to other molecules. Right? One molecule can oxidize or reduce another molecule depending on their relative oxidation status. But most of the time when people are thinking of antioxidants, they're thinking about, you know, supplements that you can take that are generally going to reduce or remove oxidation from other biological molecules. And the idea is and it that, as part of a byproduct of metabolism, we produce things like reactive oxygen species, which we know can cause damage. In fact, one of the early theories of aging was the oxidative theory of aging that that aging was really driven by oxidative damage, and and then that was modified to the idea that the oxidative damage primarily comes from mitochondria, right, from metabolism. So based on that, it is certainly plausible that if you could prevent that oxidative damage, that would be beneficial. And there's evidence to support that in in experimental studies. The challenge is, that oxidative, signaling is also important for health. Right? So we know that, oxidation status can be used as a way to signal throughout the body and within the cells important functions. And so if you block that, that's actually detrimental. I think the challenge with antioxidant supplements aside from the fact that that, you know, we don't know exactly where the antioxidants are gonna go and how effective they're gonna be is how to target the bad reactive oxygen species and not target the good reactive oxygen species. And we just don't understand that biology enough. So so the answer is, you know, too much antioxidants is gonna be bad. And I don't personally and I don't think anybody really has a good feel for Mhmm. At the population or individual level, what is the optimal amount right now. Because, like, megadoses is probably not the one that do it. Yeah. And timing probably matters as well. Like And particularly where you target. Like Yeah. There's some interesting data around, what people would call mitochondrial targeted antioxidants or mitochondrally targeted peptides that reduce oxidative stress. The it's intriguing. It has not yet to the level where I would suggest people should go out and start taking these things necessarily. But the idea that you could specifically target the antioxidants to the cellular compartment that is most problematic makes a lot of sense. And so I think there are opportunities there. We just don't have those tools yet. Yeah. Alright. Next question. What percentage do supplements versus lifestyle play a role in longevity? So how much percentage? Well, I mean, it I I would definitely say that lifestyle is far more important than supplements, at least in terms of what we know is gonna work. I think the challenge with supplements is we don't know what the right supplements are or how effective they could be. So right now, my confidence is a 100% that you can improve your health span and likely your lifespan through lifestyle modifications. And my confidence is less than 10% that you can do that through supplements. And even if you could, I think it would be incremental compared to lifestyle. Right. Lifestyle is by far the best opportunity to improve health span and probably lifespan for the vast majority of of people. Whether it would be, like, the ratios, like, do supplements give you 5% or something? Again, I I don't know is the answer. I'm put I'm a I'm a scientist, so I have to say I don't know. My guess is, you know, it depends on the person. So I would and I would put supplements in a couple of categories. I think there are supplements where we can measure deficiencies or where we know most people are deficient. And if you're deficient, supplements can have a a relatively large impact on at least mortality risk and risk of certain diseases. Right? So, you know, think things like vitamin d or omega threes where there's pretty good evidence that if you're deficient, there's a a a higher risk of a variety of different health negative health outcomes. Right. But then there and so there, I would say if for people who are deficient, supplements could have a, you know, maybe it's 80% lifestyle, 20% supplements or something like that. Mhmm. But when we start getting into the more, you know, questionable stuff, NAD precursors Right. Spermidine, urolithon a, alfiketoglutarate. Right? I'm just picking those out of error, and I'm not I'm not saying there's no value to those. They're speculative. And the nature of speculation is I have to guess what the likelihood is that they're gonna work. I would say it's, like, 95% lifestyle, 5% something that's maybe even more Yeah. Towards lifestyle. But that more comes from confidence that lifestyle is going to have a big effect. Yeah. Yeah. I agree. Like, even if there are, like, some supplements that, have some effects, you know, that they're not gonna replace exercise and good sleep and, diet. They may supplement those things. Right? Like, creatine's a good example. Right? I mean, I think for for a lot of people, creatine can have some benefits. I don't know if it's a big benefit or a small benefit. My guess is it's still relatively small compared to lifestyle. But I think, especially, if you're practicing a healthy lifestyle, having a supplement like that can give you added value, in the context of practicing a healthy lifestyle. Yeah. K. Next question. Other than rapamycin, which compound is most likely to extend lifespan? That's a good question. So, I'm pretty bullish on SGLT two inhibitors. So these are things like conagliflozin and pegliflozin. They have come out of the mouse intervention testing program as increasing lifespan in mice. There's, human correlative data from UK Biobank that people taking these drugs have a lower, risk of all cause mortality compared to health matched people who are not taking those drugs. They're anti diabetes drugs. Basically, they my understanding is they work by causing you to pee out more glucose Mhmm. From from from your your circulatory system. So they seem pretty promising. I think, estrogens and estradiols are really interesting. They also fit coming out of the interventions testing program in mice as increasing lifespan in males. And, again, UK Biobank data seem to be associated with lower all cause mortality in females. That would probably mostly be in the context of, hormone replacement therapy in women, because not a lot of men have been put on estrogens or estradioles, but also maybe birth control. So I'm not suggesting that women, you know, who who who are not perimenopausal or menopausal go out and start taking hormone replacement therapy. I don't think we're there yet, but it's the biology is intriguing. The thing is with the the estrogens and estradiols, we don't understand the mechanism yet, so it's hard to know. I'm certainly not suggesting men run out and start taking these things, but I'm I'm interested to see. So those are two classes that I would I would say have, both preclinical and human data suggestive of of lower all cause, mortality. And and and, certainly, I would put again, I don't know about lifespan, but I would put hormone therapy particularly in women. Although I also think in many men as a major health span booster. Mhmm. So, we don't have longevity data yet, but but in terms of impact on health span outside of lifestyle Right. I would probably say hormone therapy is the maybe the next biggest thing that a lot of people can benefit from. Mhmm. What about some of the acarbose? Yeah. Acarbose is interesting. That also comes out of the, the interventions testing program as one of the first things after rapamycin to show a robust effect. Also, only in males or mostly in males, and we don't really understand the the sex differences there. Human data on a Carbos, we don't have like, it it it we don't have the sort of UK Biobank level, and, at least this is my understanding. In the context of a Western diet, a carbox is not really well tolerated because of gastrointestinal upset, flatulence, things things like that. So, so I don't I don't I'm I'm a little bit I mean, it's interesting. I'm a little bit less bullish on the translational application of a carbox than SGLT two inhibitors, probably working through a similar mechanism. Acarbose. So, again, acarbose is also an anti diabetes drug. I mentioned the SGLT two inhibitors cause you to to to basically pee out more glucose. Acarbose probably works by causing you to take up less glucose or other sugars that get converted into glucose because it, it's an inhibitor of an intestinal enzyme involved in breaking down complex carbohydrates. So as a class, I think, anti diabetes drugs tend to promote longevity in laboratory animals. And certainly in, western populations, metabolic dysfunction is a hallmark of aging that probably drives a lot of age related processes. So anti diabetes drugs, you know, metformin being the classic example are often thought about in the case of of longevity. Maybe it's worth talking about metformin as well in this context. I'm not particularly bullish on metformin in metabolically healthy people. Mhmm. Like, again, in people who are who are diabetic or prediabetic, metformin is a really good diabetes drug. Unlike a carbo and SGLT two inhibitors, metformin does not appear to increase lifespan or at least if it does in mice, it's a very small effect. It did not come out as positive in their intervention testing program. And the early data that that, people taking metformin were at lower risk of dying has not, not been replicable. Mhmm. So so if you're diabetic and you're taking metformin, you're at lower risk of dying than if you're diabetic and you don't take anything. Right. But but in people who are not diabetic, that doesn't seem to have replicated that there's any real benefit in terms of mortality, and we're learning that metformin may blunt some of the positive benefits of exercise. So if you're not diabetic and you have a healthy lifestyle, I think metformin is probably a net net negative there. Yeah. Next question. What's your most unpopular opinions on lifestyle and supplements, like controversial takes? Oh, I don't know if it's un unpopular. So around lifestyle, I don't know that I have any unpopular opinions. I mean, I sort of align with what I think is the consensus view around, you know, eating a a a generally whole foods diet, plant based, I think, is is a good idea. I I like meat. I eat meat, but I think largely plant based. I tend to align towards moderate to higher protein consumption, limit alcohol, avoid added sugars. Right? That I think most people who are informed are gonna land there. Exercise, mix of cardio and resistance training, you know, sleep quality relationships, I the the the the pillars of health. So I don't think I there's anything I I don't think there's anything controversial there. In supplement world, again, I tend to be pretty skeptical. I I don't again, I don't think it's controversial. It's it's a fact that some people don't like that resveratrol is the most debunked longevity molecule ever. Yeah. Resveratrol does not increase lifespan in laboratory animals on average. Right? There's been a meta analysis. It's not even my data of, like, 50 or 60 studies, and the average effect is zero. I'm sorry. That's a fact. If people don't like it, too bad. So, you know, it's just reality. Right. And yet you still hear, you know, certain influencers out there pedal the nonsense that resveratrol isn't is a longevity drug or an anti aging drug. Other than that, I don't have super strong opinions on most supplements other than I tend to be maybe more skeptical or less enthusiastic than than other people out there. Yeah. Just more waiting for more data. Yeah. And I tend to also you know, my view is that, I I tend to be be a little bit more conservative when it comes to adding a supplement to my personal, protocol because I I take the view that the human body is a really, really complicated piece of machinery, or at least that's a good anecdotal way to think about it. And if you consider any complicated piece of machinery and you go in there and you start taking screws out or pulling wires out at random, the chances you're gonna make it work better are less than the chances you're gonna break it. And I kinda think that's what a lot of people are doing when they start stacking ten, twenty, 30 supplements. Right. They're just throwing a lot of stuff at it, and they assume that there's no risk. But the reality is there is a risk. It's probably small in individual supplements. But when you start to stack a lot of stuff, again, my view is unless you have a very, very good rationale and hopefully a good understanding of the the biology that you're perturbing, the likelihood you're gonna get a better outcome is less than the likelihood you're gonna get a worse outcome. Yeah. I guess you need to know if it's working or not either. Well and that's what that's where I think having good biomarkers is really important. Yeah. I think we've got reasonable biomarkers for general health. Right? What we don't have are good biomarkers of aging longevity, right Yeah. Yet. And we can talk about biological age clocks, but at least the ones that are available to consumers now, in my view, are not sufficient of sufficient quality that we can use them to guide interventions. Mhmm. You got very very conflicting results from Yeah. So I did my own maybe that I mean, this isn't a supplement related, but that is maybe a controversial opinion. Again, I I sort of I I get that it's controversial. I don't see the controversy because I'm just I'm just pointing out data. Like Yeah. You know, you can choose to be data driven or not. I choose to be data driven. And so I did an experiment where I tested, four different biological age tests from four different companies. These are all consumer facing. Anybody can go on the Internet and buy these things. Right? And I did them in duplicate. I wish I'd done I wish I'd done triplicate or or four of each ones, but, you know, as you know, these tests are anywhere from 300 to $600 a pop. Right? So even doing eight is fairly, expensive. So, so I did four tests from four different companies in duplicate, same biological samples taken on the same day. I was fifty three and three quarters years old at the day that I did this. The results I got back ranged from low forties to mid sixties. Right? Right. Now if I took the average of all eight, it was almost spot on, my chronological age, but the variance was huge. And so, you know and and and to be fair, again, I only had duplicates. Most of the companies, the two duplicates for the same test were within three to five years. That's still a pretty big range, but, you know, relatively close. One of the companies was twenty years apart. But I think the bigger point is that we have no idea, first of all, what my true biological age is. So we can't know what the accuracy of these tests is. But we can know the precision is shit. Right? The the the the noise is bigger than the signal. And I think that's the problem is none of these tests have been, you know, validated by any regulatory body, any independent, you know, consumer watchdog organization. It's just these companies saying, our tests measure biological age. I don't know why people would trust them, but, they don't. Or if they do, we don't know which ones do. And so I don't think we can use these consumer facing biological age tests for anything right now other than enriching the people who are at these companies. Mhmm. Right. They're really useful as research tools, and so I don't wanna blast the idea that we can measure some aspect of biological age. Again, I've even been I try not to, but I've even been using that term sloppily or, you know, just just in the last few minutes. We can measure aspects of biological age in the laboratory setting. Mhmm. My concern is the rush to market and selling these to people when they aren't ready for prime time. Do you use, like, then different clocks in the laboratories or That's right. Okay. Yeah. And so maybe it's worth just briefly talking about what what's actually being measured in most of these. So first of all, people should appreciate, you can you can measure biological age a bunch of different ways. And and everybody will call it biological age, but none of them are measuring biological age as a true thing. Mhmm. What they're measuring is usually a correlation to mortality risk. Right? And so we can do that with things like LDL, HDL, insulin, glucose. Right? We can come up with a set of those markers that everybody gets on their blood test and predict your risk of dying in the next ten years. Now it may or may not be a good prediction, but we can predict it. That's what people are calling biological age clocks. It's a correlation to mortality risk. Mhmm. So in most of the consumer facing biological age clocks, they're not using those blood based those those blood based biomarkers. They're using something called DNA methylation. So these are chemical modifications on our DNA, and there are hundreds of thousands of them in our genome, and they change over time. And importantly, they determine which genes in our genome get turned up or turned down in terms of expression. So it's a connection to biology that's really important to aging. People have found that the patterns of these methylation marks change with age, and you can look at, you know, depending on the clock, anywhere between a few dozen to a 150 ish of these specific methylation marks at specific locations in the genome, and you can identify a correlation with chronological age within a year or two in the laboratory. In principle, these companies can do exactly that same test and get a correlation to chronological age if you send them your blood. Mhmm. But we don't know if they're doing exactly the same test or whether it's done well. And then the that those are the first generation clocks. The second generation clocks with which people may have heard of are instead of being based on, chronological age trained on chronological age, it's a different set of marks that are correlated with three year, five year, ten year mortality or risk of dying or your risk of developing specific age related diseases. Same principle, though. It's a correlation to those things. And those things, mortality risk, is correlated to biological age. Right? It's not a perfect correlation, though. It's not the same as biological age. So, really, what these tests are measuring is a correlation to a correlation. Mhmm. But they're calling it biological. Right. That's that's part of, I think, the the the lack of clarity about what we actually mean. So, again, I think the take home message, though, is these can be very powerful in the research world, And I think we'll get to a point where they can be useful, say, in clinical trials in predicting whether or not a new drug, a new intervention is gonna lower risk of mortality. Mhmm. And when used responsibly, if we can convince regulators that this is actually a really good prediction of your risk of dying, you could do a clinical trial and get a drug approved. It would be what's called a conditional approval potentially, based only on the test. But we have to convince the regulators these things actually work, and this is another potential problem to the companies rushing these things to market. It when the regulators realize they don't work because the ones that are being rushed to market don't work, it's gonna be harder for responsible people to convince them, oh, yeah. They actually do work because we're doing it right. Mhmm. You know? Yeah. Maybe the last thing that's worth commenting on, because I I know you've talked about this as well, you can also use a different set of methylation marks that are correlated with the change in health over time. This is the pace of aging, the Dunedin pace of aging or rate of aging. Mhmm. So there's a different set of methylation marks across a population level study that had been shown to correlate with whether people stay healthy over time or have a decline in health over time or maybe even their health gets better. And so based on those marks, people developed a different clock that is supposed to measure your rate of aging, your pace of aging. Again, it's a correlation to health outcomes, and a change in your health is correlated to change in your biological age. So still a correlation to a correlation, but that's really valuable if it works because then you can do experiments and say, you know, what happens if I stop drinking alcohol? Does my rate of aging go up or go down? And be informed by that. So, again, that's really, really exciting, and it seems to work in the laboratory, in a research setting, or maybe not I shouldn't say laboratory, in, academic controlled study, could be of people. But we have no idea whether these companies that are telling you your pace of aging, whether that is meaningful or not because, again, it's it's not there's no quality control or or external validation. Yeah. I tend to agree. Yeah. Like, there's a lot of, noise with those, tests. I wanna take a quick break to let you know that you can now get my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. It contains 24 chapters ranging from the biology of aging to all the major chronic diseases such as heart disease, kidney disease, neurodegeneration, and I also cover over 70 clinically relevant biomarkers for chronic diseases and their optimal ranges. You can get the book from the link in the description. Next question, peptides for longevity. Do you have any opinion about that? So, like, PPC, GRPs as well? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So I first thing to say is I think people lump peptides together, but but that's kinda like lumping drugs together. Right? Peptides are just bioactive molecules that have a certain type of chemical structure based on the fact that they're a combination of amino acids. That's what peptides means. So, they can have all sorts of different effects. And and and so it's important for people to appreciate, you know, you wouldn't necessarily put rapamycin with aspirin, with, you know, a p d five and with Viagra. Right? They all can do different things. Peptides can also do lots of different things. They are biologically active. Our bodies produce many peptides. So so you can categorize peptides based on whether they're naturally occurring or new drugs that people have synthesized. Right? And I think it's plausible that naturally occurring peptides are going to be, like, BPC one fifty seven are gonna be less likely within a physiological range to have really negative outcomes. Whereas if you're taking a new peptide that our bodies have never seen, they're they could be much more likely to have be much more potent and have have negative outcomes. Of course, there's gonna be exceptions to that. Okay. So all of that is groundwork. I'm not aware of any peptides yet that have been shown to slow aging or increase lifespan in laboratory hands. Right. Do I believe they could? Absolutely. Do I believe peptides exist that will slow aging? Absolutely. I have just haven't seen data on any of the popular ones. Yeah. I think GLP one agonists are super interesting. So Wegovy, Munjaro, things like that that that people have heard of for anti obesity. I think they have a really good chance of increasing lifespan in laboratory animals. The thing I'm really interested with about there is is it through if it does increase lifespan, is it through a caloric restriction mechanism, or is it through a mechanism independent of caloric intake? You know, when people first started talking about this, I was of the opinion that, sure, they'll increase lifespan, but it's just gonna be caloric restriction. Right. As I've seen more and more data on, targets of GLP one agonists outside of limiting appetite or food intake, I'm becoming more intrigued by the possibility that they could actually have positive health benefits through other mechanisms. I would love to see that experiment done. I have not seen anybody I've not heard of anybody doing that experiment yet in laboratory animals, but I'd love to see it done. And in people, I think, again, there's clear evidence that GLP one agonists can have impacts on a variety of age related diseases. That could all be because you're you're reducing obesity or taking people from, you know, the the obese range down to the overweight range or overweight to normal health range. Mhmm. But it's also possible that there are other other impacts. Again, speaking about GLP one agonist, it's worth, I think, emphasizing that, unfortunately, the way those things were rolled out to people, a lot of people, were not given sufficient education around the importance of eating a quality diet when you're taking these drugs and doing some sort of resistance training. A lot of people lost a lot of lean mass in addition to fat mass. And I think what we've learned is when that happens and people come off these drugs, they tend to gain much of the weight back, but they don't get the lean mass back. So what we may be doing with if people are not eating a healthy diet and practicing resistance training is increasing frailty, and, osteoporosis, in the elderly population. So just just important for people to really understand. Great drugs, very powerful. They work, and you need to take steps to ensure that you maintain or actually improve your body composition when you're taking. I think that's gotten better. The other last thing I'll say about that is also pay attention to hormones when you're on these things. Because anytime you're in a Yeah. Caloric restricted state, your hormones can become perturbed. Okay. That's GLP one agonist. The other ones I I you know, this is an area where I I need to do a deep dive and I've been meaning to for a while to really take a close look at the common, peptides that are out there. I think, BPC is super interesting. The papers I've read in rodents, really interesting effects, lots of anecdotal stories. You know, it will it generally work for people as a regenerative peptide or a healing peptide? I don't know. It would be great to have clinical trials. The growth, growth hormone secretogogs, again, really interesting. You know, there I I I wonder, you know, is that any better than just taking growth hormone? I get you can do hand wavy sort of, you know, explanations for why it might be. I haven't really seen anything that makes me believe that. I also haven't seen a lot of data on how effective these things are at increasing growth hormone. And, honestly, the data on growth hormone as a longevity drug is pretty weak. You know, this is getting a little bit in the weeds, so we don't need to go there. I will say Greg Fahey and his TRIM protocol, which includes growth hormone, is intriguing. This is a thymus regeneration protocol. But outside of that, I haven't seen a lot of evidence that that the growth hormone per se is good for longevity. And then there's a variety of other peptides that potentially target mitochondria and other things Yeah. Very early, very experimental. It is interesting how many doctors in this space are comfortable prescribing these things with very, very little data. Mhmm. Yeah. One of the questions is actually about the TRIM protocol. Yeah. So you can explain what it is. Yeah? Yeah. So so I actually have an episode on the OptiSpan podcast for people who wanna wanna get a deep dive into this. I I sat down with Greg, about a month ago down in LA. So the the TRIM protocol is based around the idea that, relatively early in life, so adolescence or post puberty, early twenties, there is a pretty dramatic decrease in thymic function. And our thymus is important for, among other things, producing t cells, which are really important for the function of our immune system. So the idea is that because the thymus declines pretty dramatically and then there's this slow but steady decline as we get older, this is contributing to immune dysregulation, both a decline in immune function and an increase in what's called sterile inflammation or something like autoimmunity. So Greg, came up with an idea for how to restore thymic function in people who are forties, fifties, sixties, seventies. It's called TRIM. Mhmm. And the protocol is basically, growth hormone, DHEA, which is a a precursor for testosterone, and other hormones, also declines with age, and metformin. And the rationale, as I understand it, is the growth hormone is really doing the action here. Mhmm. So the growth hormone does a couple of things to the thymus. It, so one of the things that happens during what's called thymic involution, this dramatic loss in function is there's an infiltration of fat in the thymus. We see this in other tissues as well, but it happens early in the thymus. So growth hormone reverses that and at least causes the volume of the thymus to to grow. Right? Now is it actually new cells, new stem cells? I don't know that we know that, but you can see it by MRI. You can see an increase in volume of the thymus. The DHEA is sort of in there, not a not a great scientific rationale, but but in part because DHEA goes down with age and it and it may have some benefit for thymic function and maintaining hormonal balance. And, again, we talk about this a little bit in the episode for people who are interested. The metformin is in there because growth hormone can have a negative impact on insulin sensitivity and, glucose, homeostasis. So metformin, again, anti diabetes drug. This is to sort of offset that. I asked Greg about this. There's no data. I am intrigued by the idea that maybe SGLT two inhibitors could substitute for metformin, counteract maybe some of the bad stuff about metformin, get me if SGLT two inhibitors have a longevity effect on their own, also give you that, but there's no data on that. So what Greg has shown is in a in a number of small but intriguing human studies, evidence that the TRIM protocol over several months can, improve thymic volume, reduce the fat infiltration, and and probably improve T cell function and immune function, although that hasn't been measured in as much, depth as at least I would like to see. They also have some evidence that the epigenetic clocks that we were talking about earlier, show what would be perceived as, improvements in biological age or reduced risk of mortality. So I would say pretty intriguing data, and it certainly makes sense that improving thymic function in older people is going to be generally beneficial. So I personally am, at some point, going to give TRIM a try. I I just need to figure out the logistics of the MRI. I wanna make sure I measure it. Right? I wanna know, like, what actually happened. So the logistics of the MRI analysis, make sure I get that done before, get, you know, at least some biomarker panel that's gonna tell me about inflammation and immune function before and then and then do the same thing afterwards. Right. Would rapamycin have any effect on the thymus? Yeah. I asked Greg that. He doesn't have any data. Okay. It's I don't know the answer. I I I if I don't know. I mean, I'm I think it's possible that you would also see a restoration at least of thymic volume and and a reduction in fat infiltration from rapamycin. And that but that's it's really speculative. That's just based on some of the data on rapamycin effects on fat metabolism from laboratory animals. And then there's some intriguing, data both in rodents and in humans on, rapamycin treatment increasing, volume of the hippocampus and the caudate nucleus. So it's in the brain, very different. Right? But by MRI, at least in people who are, APOE three four carriers. So APOE four is the Mhmm. One of the biggest genetic risk factors for dementia and heart disease. So they tend to have an accelerated decline in brain volume in those regions, and and there's two studies now that have that have shown or at least strongly suggested, reversal of the that reduction in brain volume as well as improved cerebral blood flow. So I'm intrigued by the possibility, yes, that rapamycin could have an impact on thymiculation, but but no data that I know of. Yeah. But does it, like, slow down immunosuppence so that decline? So what we know from laboratory studies and then the human studies I alluded to earlier from from from Joan Manek is that, functionally, you see an improvement in vaccine response. So there's definitely a change in age related immune function decline, and you see very potent reductions in chronic inflammations in mice across many different tissues and organs. And, again, anecdotal data in people with, you know, autoimmune or chronic inflammation that they have an alleviation of symptoms of inflammation with off label use of rapamycin. So I think it's reasonable to it's a reasonable hypothesis that rapamycin would would have a positive impact on an in immunosenescence in people. I don't think we have any data directly addressing that at this point. Mhmm. Gotcha. Next question, is IV NAD pure hype? Intra intravenous? I mean, I would say it's a it's a little bit better than pure hype. Again, you know, I've talked to I've talked to docs who do it regularly. You know, they say some of their patients, you know, have some pretty significant improvements in in how they feel. So I I wouldn't wanna say there's nothing there. Again, I'm not aware of any data, you know, from rigorous studies showing benefits in a population of people or or across a a population of people from IV NAD. Right. Again, this the the the the hypothesis behind this is that NAD levels decline with age and that by restoring NAD, that's gonna be beneficial. That hypothesis or that idea that NAD levels generally decline with age is also not strongly supported by the literature. Again, there's evidence there, but but that has been sort of overstated by people who have a vested interest in promoting that model. Often, they're selling NAD precursor supplements. So I think my my my gut feeling is some people, particularly those who have significant mitochondrial dysfunction or metabolic dysfunction, do indeed have perturbed NAD homeostasis, and that can be reflected as either a decrease in NAD itself or a shift in the redox state of NAD towards NADH. Those people may benefit and feel better from NAD drips or from NAD precursors. I I think maybe the last thing to say on this is there's a variety of ways that people are trying to boost NAD. So the NAD drips is one. NAD precursors that are taken orally, NMN, NR are the two expensive ones. Nicotinamide, niacin are the two cheap ones. All of them in theory, if you take enough, can boost your NAD levels. And then there's a sort of a new sort of, movement towards sublingual NAD or sublingual NMN. All of those in theory should increase circulating NAD levels. And so I don't know of any reason to believe that one is necessarily better than the other from that perspective. Yeah. I've never done NAD drips, by the way. Yeah. I'm sort of intrigued. I I'm kinda like you where I kinda I like to try stuff and see Yeah. You know, do I feel anything? But I haven't tried it yet. I haven't tried either. I've heard it's, like, can be uncomfortable because it's, like, several hours long and Yeah. Yeah. You can do it fast if it makes more Yeah. I I I mean, this I don't know if this is on your list or not. Sort of related just because it's it's, IV related and takes a few hours that one thing I am becoming more intrigued by is therapeutic plasma exchange. Right? The idea and this is based on the parabiosis experiments in mice that there's bad stuff that accumulates with age in our circulatory system and and good stuff in young animals. And if you connect the circulatory system of a young mouse and an old mouse, the I mean, this is this is an oversimplification, but I'm gonna say it anyways because it it sounds good. And it more or less fits the biology. The old mouse becomes younger, the young mouse becomes older. Right? Mhmm. So therapeutic plasma exchange is kinda doing half of that equation. Right? It's it's it's taking some of the bad stuff out of circulation. I'm becoming more convinced there's there's real potential benefit there, both in the context of aging, but also maybe in the context of things like, you know, microplastic exposure or heavy metal exposure. Right? So so I think that's interesting. I also haven't tried that yet, but that's definitely on the short list of stuff I wanna I wanna try. Yeah. Me too. Like, there's even, like, this EBO, which is, like, you do, yeah, like a dialysis and filter the blood, and then you, like, shoot ozone and UV light into it as well to Yeah. That sounds a little more sketchy to me, but, but, I mean, again, maybe. Principle principle isn't necessarily comes from a little bit of lack of of of knowledge of what the research actually shows. Yeah. Yeah. Well, the EBOW is usually used for, like, autoimmune conditions and, those kind of things. Yeah. Next question. Does low IGF one increase longevity, and is low IGF one bad for the brain? Yeah. So low IGF one during development, and let's just start with nonhuman animals first. Right? So mice, rats, and dogs. I think it's it's pretty clear that low IGF one during development leads to smaller body size and increased lifespan on average. Every individual is different, but on average in a population, yes. It slows aging. Seems to slow aging. In people, it's a little bit less clear, but but there is data from from studies of people who have mutations in, I think it's a growth hormone receptor, but that leads to lower IGF one, that they are at lower risk for cancer, heart disease, metabolic disease, despite even having more adiposity. Right? So they're they're but they're smaller of stature. They don't they don't live longer, but it's interesting because the the increases in cause of death come from alcoholism and accidents. So lifespan doesn't change, but risk of at least some age related diseases does change. So I think it's plausible in people that biological aging is slowed when you have lower IGF one levels through development as well. How low? Like, because Yeah. But you see from some of these observational studies is that if it's, like, too lower, like, below a 100 Wow. Then it can increase risk. So, again, I think you have to be you have to be clear. I'm talking about people who are naturally low in IGF one Gotcha. From gestation through development their whole life. So they probably have genetic variants that make them low in IGF one. Mhmm. When you look at cross sectional or even longitudinal population data in adults, that's a very different situation. Mhmm. Because those people presumably or may have gone through development with much higher levels. So they could still be high large in stature or small in stature, but to have an IGF one level that doesn't match their stature, which is determined by IGF one level Gotcha. Development. So, and I think that's important because, you know, there are people who are thinking about therapeutic strategies to lower IGF one in adulthood with the idea that it will slow aging. As far as I know, there's only one study in mice that looked at this. It was a study that Derek Hoffman, at Einstein did several years ago now. And they had a modest but statistically significant increase in lifespan, I wanna say in males but not female mice. I might I might be backwards on that. But nowhere near the magnitude of effect that you get from having low IGF one during development. Mhmm. And that probably was primarily an anticancer mechanism. And this is a place where I mean, in general, I think studying aging in mice and then extrapolating to humans is reasonable. It's certainly much more reasonable than what what people have done in mice with cancer or heart disease and artificially causing the disease. Mice age very much like people do. But mice in the laboratory don't tend to die from frailty, sarcopenia, fractures. They do get some of that, but it doesn't kill them. They tend to die well, they tend to die from euthanasia, but but usually the euthanasia is is downstream of cancer. And, certainly, all mice will die with cancer. So it's a little bit different than people. I think the IGF one benefits the lower IGF one benefits in adult mice primarily come from anti cancer. Right. So then the question is, will that extrapolate to people or dogs? And there's a company called Loyal that is moving forward with a a a drug that will reduce IGF one in adult dog. We just don't know. One of the arguments you'll hear for a low protein diet in people is that it will lower IGF one and thereby lower cancer. Mhmm. The data on that is not particularly compelling. And and, again, there's, you know, there's a little bit of of disagreement about what the on whole, what the epidemiological data actually shows. My take is that, low protein and that causes low IGF one, but but is the IGF one causing the downstream effects on mortality is is not known. Low protein above about age 55 is generally a bad idea. You're you're at higher risk of frailty, sarcopenia, fractures, and death than eating a high protein diet. Obviously, that's a correlation, and it could be due to all sorts of other factors. Mhmm. High protein is also not great if you're eating an unhealthy diet. So if you're overfed and eating a lot of crap and eating high protein, that does increase your risk of cancer. So my view is the best bet is to eat relatively high protein, high quality diet. Yeah. That's independent of IGF one, but we're saying. So, so does IGF one work differently in the brain? This is really interesting. Again, yeah, it does. I don't know about I I don't wanna make a blanket statement about aging, but data from the dog aging project is really intriguing here. So in almost every age related disease that you can think of and also for lifespan, small dogs age slower than big dogs do. Small dogs have lower IGF one through development. That's why they're small, and they live longer and seem to age slower than big dogs do. You can look at a bunch of different age related diseases and functional declines, except for dementia. Dementia is the only one I'm aware of. I'm there might be others. It's the only one I'm aware of that has come out of our dataset so far where there doesn't seem to be any difference in dementia risk between small dogs and big dogs. So and it's not and it doesn't scale with biological age. In other words, 12 year old German shepherd has roughly the same dementia risk as a 12 year old, you know, I don't know, chihuahua. Right? Small dog. So that suggests that if IGF one is really driving the difference in aging rate in the rest of the body, it the same relationship isn't there in the brain. And it's it's not as strong, but there might even be a hint of protection in the big dogs. And there's a hint of that in people as well. So, yeah, it might be the case that having higher IGF one is better for brain aging. I think an interesting question is, is that effect due to higher IGF one during development, or is it due to higher IGF one during adulthood? I really don't know the answer to that. So does the IGF one, like, help with neuron growth, or what does it do? I don't think we know. Yeah. I don't think we know. Or at least I don't know. Maybe maybe people who are experts in in, in the brain or in dementia would have a better feel for that. It is interesting to me that one of the therapies, you know, that has gotten some traction, for for dementia is intranasal insulin, and the insulin and IGF one signaling pathways overlap. So, again, that may have nothing to do with this relationship, but it is sort of intriguing. There may be a connection there. Yeah. I think it's with mTOR as well. Like, mTOR is needed for neuroplasticity. It is. Yeah. I mean, again, the the the you're right. The challenge with, the challenge with interpreting that as as causal for anything to do with dementia is, you know, it's really all about the levels of signaling through IGF one Mhmm. Or or mTOR. So and and where that comes from is if you completely inhibit mTOR, you you take a very high dose of rapamycin. Yeah. You'll block neuroplasticity. You'll block, you know, new memory formation. That's because mTOR is required for all protein synthesis and cell division. Right? Yeah. So the question and this gets back to, like, muscle function, which we talked about before or or lean mass, muscle formation. If you turn down mTOR too much, you won't build new muscle. But is it possible that turning it down a little bit from where it's at, especially in the context of aging, is actually gonna be net beneficial for muscle or for cognitive function or for memory formation? I think that's why we see these benefits from rapamycin because we're only turning it down a little bit and maybe transiently turning it down as opposed to just, you know, dropping it down to the floor. Yeah. Next question. Do you use AI and, language models in your work? I do. I use it a lot. Yeah. I mean, and it's and it's growing. Right? I mean, I think I think I'm certainly not one of these people who subscribes to the idea that AI is gonna solve all of our problems. But, I use it, we use it at OptiSpan, and we're thinking a lot about so, again, OptiSpan is really about creating tools, technologies for to enable people to get on a better health trajectory, Right? Mhmm. Writ large. So we have clinical programs, but we are absolutely trying to think about how do we use these AI tools to integrate lots of different data types, to get that back to people, to create interactive ways for doctors and patients to interact with their data. Lots of other people are thinking about this as well. I see really, really powerful use cases in the clinical application, and what I would call health span medicine or what Peter Attia would call medicine three point o. Although, I actually think that's medicine four point o when we add AI and geroscience on top of medicine three point o. So, yes, there there are tons of really obvious use cases that are going to happen. You and I, within the next few years, will have a health span agent on our devices that we can interact with if we want to. Right. And it will function as well as most doctors. Mhmm. Very confident that can happen. Yeah. We're not that far away. So that's a really obvious use case for for AI. I think in the broader, you know, longevity, geroscience space, AI is gonna gonna accelerate the pace of research everywhere, including geroscience and longevity. But I think we need much better datasets than we currently have in order for AI to really be a game changer when it comes to understanding the biology of aging and being able to use that to impact lifespan and health span. I think our datasets right now are pretty bad. Mhmm. Certainly in the intervention space, our dataset is woah woefully underrepresented for all of the different genetic or environmental, and I put small molecules under environmental, things that we could test to see what impacts longevity. Mhmm. Tiny, tiny fraction. And I sort of, you know, use the analogy that, you know, garbage in, garbage out. Everybody gets that. Right? You put garbage into the best AI tool, you're gonna get garbage out. You put rapamycin and metformin and acarbosin, guess what you're gonna get out. Right? We need a better dataset to know what are the most effective ways to impact longevity than what we've got right now. Mhmm. And then I would also add to that, we need larger human, what you, you know, sort of crudely describe as multi omic longitudinal datasets. Basically, over time in lots of people measure everything you could think to measure. Yeah. Those are observational in nature, but and they're very, very complex datasets, but that's the kind of thing that the new AI tools are gonna be very Yeah. Capable of of sort of teasing out what's important. So that's what I would like to see. The AI tools are gonna keep developing. I'd like to see smart people in the longevity community actually put some thought into figuring out as these things keep developing, how do we use them most effectively to really move the needle? Mhmm. Yeah. Do you think, like, the AI will figure itself out things that isn't in the data or, like, because I don't know. I'm less optimistic about that. Right. I kinda feel like the imp the the the sort of foundational information needs maybe I'm wrong. I hope I'm wrong. But I sort of feel like the foundational information needs to be there. And, again, you know, I I sort of use this this graphic sometimes in my talks where, you know, I compare the hallmarks of aging, which are just a representation of our how much we understand aging today, the biology of aging today, And I compare it to a map of the surface of the Earth, you know, in 500 BC, right, which I don't know if you've ever seen this map. He Hakaetus' map. But, you know, it's got, like, a a a a sort of, you know, vaguely Europe shaped thing in Asia that looks nothing like Asia, and Libya's Think of that Earth. 10 times as as yeah. And then and then you sail too far and you fall off the edge. Yeah. So if you think about it that way, you could have the best AI tool in the world and you give it that map and say, show me the surface of the Earth. It's not gonna show you the surface of any Earth that looks anything like what we know what it looks like today. I sort of feel that is is is the same idea if we give it how we understand aging today. Yeah. I'd love to be wrong, but but that's the way that the way I would guess it's gonna go. Yeah. Next question, how much protein will longevity? How much is it? Again, I don't we'd honestly, we don't know the answer, and it's gonna be individual. Right? So there's two things I would say. I I would say for most people, the important thing and it's gonna depend on the quality of the diet, definitely, that you're eating. So I would say the best strategy for most people to adopt is what I would consider moderate to high protein. So anywhere from and, again, I'm just throwing numbers out, but anywhere from point six to one gram per pound of body weight per day. But you gotta be eating a high quality diet. If you're eating a crappy diet and eat a lot of protein, you're gonna increase your risk for cancer, period. So, like, sugar and, fruits simple sugars. Again, highly processed foods in general, cut out highly processed foods. We can have a debate. I mean, I had this conversation with with Peter, Peter Atia recently, you know, about protein bars. Right? And his view is if you have really good ingredients and you can maximize sorta, like, the protein ratio per calorie, that that's that's a good thing. Right? So and I think there's that's a reasonable like, that's a reasonable thing. I still wouldn't say eat 10 protein bars a day even though they're the best protein bars in the world, but I don't wanna say never eat highly processed foods. But most highly processed foods have a lot of added sugars. Read the frigging labels. I can't believe still today a lot of people don't look at labels. Like, cut out the simple sugars. Right? Cut down the alcohol. Don't waste your calories on nonsense. So eat a high quality diet, Then I think high protein relatively and definitely resistance training should be part of your exercise routine. That to me, those three are really the strategy, and you can't really talk about protein in the absence of that. Might there be a slight increased risk of cancer from doing that compared to not compared to eating a low protein diet? Yeah. There might be. But I think by eating a high quality diet and exercising regularly, you probably dramatically reduce that increased risk. Right. And you're gonna get lots of benefits in terms of muscle mass for metabolic health, bone density for frailty, hormonal health. Like, you're gonna get all these other benefits that more than offset the if there is a tiny increased risk of cancer, the increased risk of cancer. Yeah. Again, I don't really like I mean, you hear people do this all the time, and it's like, you know, oh, I look at that guy, and he looks 65, so his longevity protocol must not be working. I'm like, yeah. He's actually 75. It's working great. I don't like I don't like that sort of mindset. But the the honest answer is I know people who have dabbled with and still practice a very low protein diet. In general, they don't look very good, and they don't seem very happy. Mhmm. So that's a generalization, but I do think that, you know, if you look around in your own life and and you see the same thing, that may be telling you something. Mhmm. So no protein margaritas. Yeah. I'd I'd never had a protein margarita. That's for sure. I'm sure they're out there somewhere. And, next question, what makes grip strength link to health span? Oh, good question. Yeah. I mean, I tend to think it's it's mostly just a reflection of overall muscle function and muscle quality. Right? I don't think there's anything special about GripStruid per se. I do think, you know, having a having a a a good grip strength functionally for being able to do the stuff you wanna do in your daily life is a good idea, but I wouldn't necessarily I definitely don't train for grip strength itself. It's a byproduct. Yeah. It's a byproduct of of of being strong, being able to lift weight. But like I said, if your grip strength is low, that will make it harder for you to to do the stuff that you wanna be able to do when you're 60, 70, 80 years old. Yeah. So be strong, I think, is the real answer there. Yeah. Like, yeah, they find that even twenty, thirty years in advance, if you have low grip strength, then you're gonna have hard time putting on clothes, getting off the toilet. But that usually reflects a sedentary lifestyle and and and not being not having sufficient muscle mass throughout your entire body. Like, I think there are probably very few people who have sufficient muscle mass everywhere else, and their grip strength is low. Yeah. So I guess it's like, yeah, like, if you're otherwise with decent muscle and strength and, in good health, you should have, like, at least, like, above normal grip strength. Absolutely. You don't have to train specifically for the grip strength. Yeah. I've never been one of those guys that, you know, has that gripper thing and and does that. Right? Right. Although, I mean, I've used it. It's it's a very good exercise for the grip like. Yeah, yeah. It will increase your grip rate for your forearms. Yeah. Good for pull ups. Good for former carries. And yeah. Yeah. Good for arm wrestling if someone is interested. Next question, preserving women's fertility and AMH with Ah. I guess that's like a marker of fertility or equality. Yeah. So I'm definitely not an expert in female reproductive health. They're really, really smart people out there who who are looking into this also. I'll just preface it by that. So, again, I would I would my immediate, you know, answer to that is that like almost any other again, it's gonna be dependent on your genetics and and and whether you're at, high risk for, you know, premature infertility or or menopause or or other ovarian some syndromes. But in general, the same lifestyle factors that are going to have a positive impact on other aspects of age related functional decline in other tissues and organs are also going to have a positive impact on reproductive health. So I know that's not a that's not a profound answer, but I think it's important to appreciate. That's almost always gonna be the place to start if you are concerned about a particular age related functional decline or disease. And then you have to get into the the more, you know, either genetic risk factors or specific lifestyle risk factors that could have an impact. So I'm gonna leave it there because, again, that's outside my area of expertise. Gotcha. It is in it it is it is interesting to me, and, I view it as a positive development that the field as a whole is starting to pay much more attention to ovarian aging and female reproductive aging as both an early indicator of age related, processes Mhmm. And potentially a causal factor in differences in risk for specific age related diseases in women. So I think there's a lot that's being done and a lot of work to be done there. Yeah. Kind of follow-up question, like, what do you think of the children having children? Like, there's, like, data that having date children later in life is, like, associated with greater longevity in women. Oh, okay. Yes. So So there's two things to say there. So so I thought you were gonna ask about whether that has any negative consequences on the in in on the children. Right? So, yeah, I think my guess is the the the correlation between fertility between childbirth later in life and, longevity in women is mostly because women who are able to have children later in life have a later cessation of reproduction. In other words, their ovarian aging is delayed for some reason. Yeah. And so aging in the rest of the body is also probably proportionally delayed. That's the most likely explanation. Although, you know, pregnancy itself does have an impact on a whole bunch of physiological functions and using these DNA methylation clocks that we talked about before. You can see changes in the DNA methylation clocks during pregnancy and after pregnancy that look like an increase in epigenetic age followed by, in most women, decrease in epigenetic age. So is it possible that the hormonal and other changes that happen during pregnancy are impacting biological aging itself? Yeah. I think that's pretty plausible. And in some women, it may actually reset some aspects of biological aging to a lower baseline value than before pregnancy. So it's total speculation, but that could also be a real thing. Yeah. So there's, like, an increases during pregnancy, the the biological age score. DNA methylation, yeah, patterns associated with biological age. Yeah. But then then would you predict that the more children you have, the faster you would age. Right? Well, again, the the data that I've seen, in most women, it goes up, but then after pregnancy, it comes back down. Okay. And in some women, it actually goes down down below baseline where they start So, yeah, if it only went up or if it only went up and it partially came back down, you would expect an acceleration of age. Right. Gotcha. But, I mean, obviously, having kids can have all sorts of other impacts on your, your stress levels and aging and and so it's complicated. Yeah. I think that is, you know, having generally more children is associated with slightly longer longevity to a certain point. Sure. And I mean, again, that could be for all sorts of reasons. It could be biological effects of pregnancy. It could be later you know, the fact that when these women can just have children later in life, their ovarian aging is delayed, their aging is delayed in their whole body, could also be due to the social component. Right? And, you know, having children who hopefully are gonna be around when you're an adult and maybe even care for you. Right? So there's all sorts of factors that could weigh into that. Yeah. Last question is, when should we start giving rapamycin to our dog? So that's for my wife. We have a puppy Yeah. Who's one point. I do not make veterinary recommendations. But hypothetically speaking, if you were going to give rapamycin to your dog, the the idea would be you're doing that because you believe that it might increase lifespan and improve health span in dogs. So, I mean, again, no way to know. So what I can say is from our studies in the dog aging project, they have all been in dogs that are over seven years old and at least 40 pounds. So that's, you know, what, about 18 kilograms. Right? And that's because big dogs age faster than small dogs. So it has nothing to do with the idea that rapamycin is gonna work better in a in a big dog than in a smaller dog. It's just because for clinical trial purposes, you need a rapidly aging population. So that's a reasonable thing to think about. Right? That roughly biological age. So if you're a 40 pound dog, seven or greater, if you're a smaller dog, might be a year or two later. But that's just a guess. What we can say from mice is that, you know, rapamycin treatment starting around that same biological age. So a 60 to 65 year old person, maybe 55 year old person to a seven, eight year old dog, increases life span pretty robustly and improves a whole bunch of health span metrics. So that would be my sort of gut reaction for and this is all really based on, I think I think maybe it's worth saying explicitly. What's the underlying sort of calculation here. Right? Mhmm. It's always a risk reward. So what's the reward from starting when, the dog's a puppy or the kid's a teenager versus the reward of starting when the dog's older or you're 50, 60. Right? Right. The difference in reward, the way we understand it now from mice is pretty small. You get pretty much the same benefits starting later in life that you do if you start the mice very young. So then what's the difference in risk? Well, certainly, if if this is before puberty, obviously, there's lots of risks that would go along with that. And I think the idea is the longer you're taking any intervention, any drug, the more likelihood that side effects could happen and compound. So, again, with rapamycin, given that we don't completely understand the risk profile, I think we've learned a lot more. We still don't completely understand it. The risk is lower if you start later. So that's kinda where I land both for off label use of people and if you're gonna do it in dogs. Yeah. Yeah. Our dog is, 1.5 years old, and he's, like, ten pounds or something, like, four kilos. Yeah. So pretty young. Right? He has a long time to go. Yeah. Which, you know, that you're gonna you're gonna most likely have that dog for fifteen, sixteen, seventeen years. Right? So Yeah. We one interesting thing, like, so he got car sickness, so we were giving him some of this nausea medication, which is like some antihistamine, and the ingredient was meclizine. Yeah. Actually, they found that there was a one of the ITP ingredients that extend it. Yeah. That's interesting. Yeah. I I actually I mean, I knew I knew from about it from the ITP study. Right. But, yeah, it's a common, anti nausea medication as well that may So he's already getting seroprotective effects. And So he's already on the protocol? Yeah. Yeah. I I assume that meclizine was only for a short period of time. Yeah. It was a small dose. It was a very small But, I mean, that's another intriguing one where from the ITP, you know, the the the mechanism that was at least how that was proposed and selected, was was based on the potential that it also is an mTOR inhibitor. So same idea as rapamycin, but could be lots of other mechanisms by which meclizine is working to have an impact on longevity in in mice. And intriguing to think about the possibility it could have similar effects in people and dogs. Yeah. Well, it was a great conversation. And where can people learn more about you? Where can they find your channel? Yeah. So, at m kabrelin on LinkedIn, x, Instagram, and then the OptiSpan podcast is you can find all sorts of content. So if you enjoyed this and maybe got a get a little bit more edgy, you can check out the OptiSpan podcast. Yeah. We'll put the link in the show notes, and, yeah, thanks for coming. Thank you. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Siim. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.