I recently made a video where I shared how I increased my VO2 max from 53 milliliters per kilogram per minute to 66 milliliters per kilogram per minute. If you run less than two kilometers in twelve minutes, then you have a poor VO2 max around 33 milliliters per kilogram per minute. A decent result would be at least 2.75 kilometers or 1.7 miles, which would be 50 milliliters per kilogram per minute. For health and longevity, you want to keep your v o two max above 50 for as long as possible. So in this video, I'm gonna give you a full guide on how to increase your v o two max. I'm gonna cover the best workouts, the best workout plan, different intensities, frequencies, and I'll also cover diet and supplements. Your cardiorespiratory fitness is reflected in maximum oxygen consumption also called v o two max and is measured in milliliters per kilogram per minute. A higher VO two max generally means you have higher card respiratory fitness and aerobic performance, but it's not a linear relationship. To measure your VO two max, you have to do the VO two max test on a treadmill or a bike. However, you can also estimate your v r two max by doing the Cooper test where you run for twelve minutes as far as possible. A v r two max over 50 milliliters per kilogram per minute is considered to be optimal, and a v r two max below 22 is the disability threshold below which you will struggle with everyday activities. So one homework that you can do is to either do the Cooper test or to do a v two max test to see what your baseline is for your v two max. You can increase your v two max and stamina with all forms of exercise, cardio, interval training, etcetera. You can even see an increase in v r two max by doing resistance training if you have a poor v r two max to begin with. This 2013 study saw that if your v r two max is below 25 milliliters per kilogram per minute as a person over the age of 60 or below 40 milliliters per kilogram per minute as an adult between ages 20 and 40, you can see improvements in v r two max by doing resistance training. However, if you're already moderately fit, your v r two max is closer to 50 already, then you need to do some form of aerobic exercise. The reason is that you need to take your heart rate closer to your maximum heart rate and closer to your v r two max. Usually, the effective training begins above 60% of your maximum heart rate, but above 50% can already work if you do it for prolonged periods of time. There are five heart rate zones. Zone one, which is 50 to 60% of your max heart rate. Zone two, sixty to 70%. Zone three, seventy to 80%. Zone four, eighty to 90%. And zone five, ninety to a 100%. A common way to know your maximum heart rate is to divide your age from two twenty. Two twenty minus 30 for me would be a 190 for my max heart rate. Then 60% of that would be a 114 beats per minute. It's not a perfect calculation because if you're already fit, your max heart rate could be higher, which it is for me. But it's a good starting point if you don't know where to start. How much should you train in these different heart rate zones depends a lot on your level of fitness. A new 2025 analysis of 13 studies saw that very athletic individuals and competitive athletes tend to see more improvements in VO2max with polarized training. Whereas less fit individuals and recreational athletes saw more results with pyramidal training. Polarized training emphasizes an eighty twenty approach where you spend 80% of your training time in the low intensity aerobic zone, such as in zone 220% at anaerobic zone, close to your VO two max, around 90% of your max heart rate. Basically, you do a lot of easy zone two cardio and some high intensity intervals with minimal time in the middle intensity gray zones. An example workout plan would be four times a week you do low intensity cardio, and twice a week you do high intensity interval training. Pyramidal training is a more traditional way to increase endurance. You spend 70% in low intensity aerobic training such as zone two at 60 to 70% of your max heart rate. 20% in the moderate intensity zone, which is zone three and four at 70 to 85% of your max heart rate, and 10% in the anaerobic zone, zone five at 90 to a 100% of your max heart rate. An example workout plan would be three times a week zone two cardio, twice a week moderate intensity training, and once a week high intensity training. Generally, it's recommended to do a mix of low intensity training and high intensity training regardless of your training status and goals. When I increased my VO two max from 53 to 66 milliliters per kilogram per minute, I did pyramidal training. I did about 70% in zone 20% in zone three and four, and 10% in zone five. Nowadays, I'm doing primarily polarized training about two times a week zone two cardio and once or twice a week hit intervals. However, there is research that about forty percent of individuals don't respond to low intensity exercise. They need to do high intensity interval training to cause a response. Interval training has been seen to improve cardiometabolic health similar to traditional endurance exercise despite spending significantly less time on exercising. How long should those intervals be if you are doing high intensity interval training? A 2019 meta analysis of 53 studies saw that all intervals, even short intervals of less than thirty seconds were effective in increasing v r two max. However, for maximum benefits, longer intervals lasting over two minutes done for over fifteen minutes and for four to twelve weeks are better. So optimally, you want to aim for intervals that are longer than two minutes repeated for over fifteen minutes in total. One very popular method of doing hit is the four by four Norwegian method. Basically, four minute intervals at 85 to 95% of your max heart rate repeated for four rounds with three to four minutes of rest at low intensity between. In total, it's a thirty two minute workout. That's my own go to hit workout, but sometimes I do three minute intervals instead of four. The more cardio you do, the higher your v two max will typically be. However, you don't have to train as often as an athlete. An interesting study just recently saw that you can get equal v two max adaptations if you train only twice a week. The catch is that you have to train twice as long on those training days. In the study, there was a high frequency group that trained four times a week. Twice a week for 35 of continuous cardio at around 80% of max heart rate And twice a week of hit at four minute intervals around 95% of max heart rate with three minutes of rest repeated for four rounds. The weekend warrior group who trained only twice a week followed the same workout plan, but they worked out only twice a week. One day, they did seventy minutes of continuous cardio at 80% of max heart rate. And one day, they did hit the same four minute intervals at 95% max heart rate with three minute rest, but repeated for eight rounds instead of four. What it means is that if you don't have time to work out four times a week, you can get the same results by just consolidating all the workouts into two days. But the catch is that those workouts have to be twice as long. I wanna take a quick break to tell you about the Boncharge infrared sauna blankets. My go to way of getting twenty minutes sauna sessions on the go without needing to spend an hour to warm up a regular sauna. Taking the sauna is in my opinion one of the best things for your overall health and heart function. Studies show that taking a sauna regularly is associated with sixty three percent lower risk of sudden cardiac death, sixty three percent reduced heart disease mortality, forty six percent lower risk of hypertension, and forty percent reduced all cause mortality. This is mediated by an increase in body temperature and increased heart rate that mimic a cardiovascular workout while at the same time improving arterial stiffness, endothelial function, blood flow, immune system function, blood pressure, and metabolic health. It doesn't matter if it's a traditional wooden sauna and infrared sauna and infrared sauna blanket or anything else that elevate your body temperature above what's normal. Bone charged infrared sauna blankets have the advantage of shining far infrared light that can penetrate deeper into your tissues than regular saunas can. It warms up in two minutes to the optimal temperature of 70 degrees Celsius and it's low in emf. There's also no plastic in the material so you're not sweating in plastic. You can get a 15% discount by heading over to boncharge.com/seamlund and use the code seam for 15% discount. Alright. Back to the video. Alright. Now that this is all out of the way, let me outline you a workout plan for increasing b o two max. If you're a beginner just getting started or you have a relatively poor fitness, then start with a pyramidal training. For example, three times a week zone two cardio, twice a week moderate intensity training, and once a week high intensity training. You don't have to jump immediately to this much training. You can start with three times a week zone two cardio and once a week high intensity training. If you're already more advanced and you have relatively speaking good fitness, then focus more on the polarized training. For example, three times a week you do low intensity zone two cardio and twice a week you do high intensity interval training. If you really want to increase your VO2 max, then you should do three high intensity workouts per week. How long should those workouts be? When doing zone two low intensity training, then aim for thirty five to fifty five minutes at 60 to 70% of your max heart rate. When doing moderate intensity training, aim for twenty to thirty five minutes at 70 to 80% of your max heart rate. When doing high intensity training, aim for two to four minute intervals for four to eight rounds, totaling at around thirty minutes at 85 to 95% of your max heart rate. The specific activities can also be whatever you like. It can be running, sprinting, rowing, cycling, hiking, walking with a weighted vest, soccer, or any other sport that gets your heart rate up. Besides training, you can also increase your v two max with diet. The most important factor is losing body fat. In fact, there's a linear relationship between body fat percentage and v o two max. The lower the body fat percentage, the higher the v o two max. And the higher the body fat percentage, the lower the v o two max. Generally speaking, losing body fat and having slightly more muscle is gonna benefit your v o two max. However, if your BMI is very high because you have a ton of muscle mass, then that's also going to impose limitations on your VO two max. So the optimal body composition for VO two max is to be more leaner with solid amounts of muscle mass, but not too much. Foods that increase your v o two max are the ones that increase blood flow through nitric oxide such as beets, beet root juice, and watermelon, as well as foods that have iron such as red meat because you need iron to carry oxygen around the body. If you're anemic, then you'll have poor stamina because of poor tissue oxygenation and poor blood flow. There are also a few supplements that can increase v o two max. Ashwagandha, a 2015 study, saw that three hundred milligrams of k s m sixty six ashwagandha twice a day increased v o two max and quality of life in healthy athletic adults. CoQ ten, a 2022 meta analysis of 13 randomized controlled trials, saw that sixty to five hundred milligrams of CoQ ten per day significantly reduces fatigue. Rhodiola rosea is another herb that's been seen to reduce fatigue and increase endurance in humans at doses above three hundred milligrams per day. There's limited evidence that rhodiola would increase Viatormax, but it can still support endurance and stamina. Cordyceps are a type of mushroom that's been seen to increase VO two max and high intensity exercise performance at a dose of three to four point five grams per day. I think it's very important to have good VO two max and good cardiovascular fitness for your general health. But you want to have a balanced workout plan that balances muscle mass and strength, as well as endurance and overall mobility. Check out my evidence based workout plan to see that next.