Glycine and NAC are one of the most promising supplements for healthy aging. There have been several clinical trials showing that the combination of these supplements improves body composition, metabolic health, strength, inflammation, and mitochondrial function in elderly people. GlyNAc has also been seen to extend lifespan in mice by up to 24%. I've been taking glycine and NAC separately for many years, but I've never actually experimented taking them together. But recently, I went through a month of taking the combination of glycine and NAC at the appropriate doses based on the studies. And I'm gonna share with you my results in this video. The reason glyNAc works so well together is because both glycine and NAC are precursors to glutathione. Cysteine is the initial precursor, and glycine is the rate limiting step. Glutathione is a powerful antioxidant in the body that protects the brain, heart, liver, skin, and bones. I've been taking glycine in megadoses for many years, and I've seen quite a few benefits. Better skin collagen synthesis, better sleep thanks to lower body temperature and relaxation, and better blood sugar and inhibition of advanced glycation end products or AGEs. Adding NAC wouldn't obviously erase those benefits. That's because NAC has slightly different effects to glycine. So adding NAC would give me some new benefits that I wasn't getting from glycine, at least theoretically. Here's what I noticed when I took the combination of glycine and NAC, and I'll tell you how much I took shortly. I saw lower muscle soreness and faster recovery from workouts by adding NAC. Taking NAC before my workouts enabled me to work out a bit longer and harder without getting fatigued. I didn't notice anything else from adding NAC that I wasn't already getting from glycine. But these two things I would attribute to NAC specifically. And these results are also supported by randomized controlled trials. Alright. What's the dosage that I followed? I've been taking glycine at a dose of around ten grams for many years, and I didn't really change that. For NAC, I was taking 2.5 NAC in the mornings before my workouts. The reason for that is that there's research showing how taking two point four grams of NAC before exercise delays a decline in forced production. Basically, you're able to recruit your muscles for longer under physical load, thanks to the preloading of gluathion. There's also research that six hundred to twelve hundred milligrams of NAC before exercise improves type two exhaustion, endurance, and reduces fatigue. I specifically didn't wanna take any NEC after my workouts because there's research that taking antioxidants such as NEC mitigates some of the benefits you get from exercise. It inhibits the mitochondrial adaptations and can inhibit muscle growth. However, taking NAC before the exercise might support performance by delaying fatigue. The two point five gram dose is also a lot higher than what people usually take, which is around six hundred to one thousand milligrams. The GLINAC studies on elderly people have found that less than two point four grams of glycine and NAC each isn't effective in raising glutathione levels, whereas doses above two point four grams are. People with low inflammation don't really see effects, but those with high inflammation do. This is the reason I haven't been megadosing glynaq with NAC so far. There's no evidence that NAC has significant benefits beyond the exercise performance benefits that I just mentioned for people who are otherwise healthy and with low levels of inflammation. However, there is evidence that older individuals with lower glutathione levels and higher inflammation do see significant benefits from NAC supplementation. Even healthy older adults show lower glutathione and higher inflammation than younger adults. That's because gluathione levels drop with age starting after the age of 45. So everyone in their sixties and seventies would appear to benefit from glynaq at larger doses because they see age related decline in gluathione. This is why I'm not going to be seeing dramatic effects from NAC supplementation. I have virtually zero inflammation. My body produces enough gluathione, and I follow an otherwise healthy lifestyle that supports gluathione production and lowers inflammation. However, as a young person, I still benefit from glycine in terms of skin collagen and skin antiaging, because skin collagen content starts declining already in your early twenties. I also benefit from the blood sugar lowering and anti AGE benefits of glycine. Plus, it helps with sleep. That's why I've been megadosing glycine for a few years now. You can check out my other video about it. NSC, however, isn't going to give me substantial benefits besides the benefits on the exercise performance if I take it earlier before the exercise. Right now, I'm gonna continue taking glycine because I've been doing it for many years. I'm gonna take around five to ten grams of glycine per day for maximal collagen synthesis. And for NAC, I'll be taking the two point five grams of NAC dose every once in a while before workouts if I have a longer or harder exercise session. What's my final opinion? I think both glycine and NAC are god tier supplements in terms of the evidence that they have. There's plenty of human evidence showing that both of these supplements are great, and they do have some health benefits. And the combination of glycine and NAC, glynac, is one of the most promising supplements for healthy aging in elderly people. It's just that as a younger individual, you might not need the large dose of NAC, but you might benefit from the large dose of glycine. Check out how I rank a 100 other supplements from worst to best next.