Imagine this, you invest a $100 per month into the S and P five hundred with an average annual return of about 10%. After ten years, you'd have around $20,000. After twenty years, that grows to about $75,000. After thirty years it's nearly $200,000. And if you kept going for fifty years that little $100 a month snowballs into over $1,400,000. That's the magic of compounding. Small consistent investments that seem insignificant in the moment can completely transform your future in decades. But here's the thing, the same compounding effect applies to your health. The small habits you build today, what you eat, how you move, how you sleep, they don't just add up, they compound. And over twenty to thirty years, these small steps can be the difference between thriving in your eighties and suffering in your eighties. In this video, I'm gonna break down how the magic of compounding works in your health and the key habits that matter the most and going to lead to massive returns on your investment in decades. When you think about what could accidentally kill you in your seventies, then it's most likely to be falling and breaking a hip. The mortality rate after one year of hip fracture is twenty two percent which is insane. One in five elderly people will die within a year of breaking a hip. The biggest determinant of surviving a hip fracture and not getting it in the first place is your bone density and muscle strength and muscle mass. People with more muscle and a higher bone density not only have lower rates of hip fractures but lower rates of dying to anything including heart disease and cancer. Unfortunately, bone density and muscle peak in your thirties and they start to decline by about 10% per decade. That's the negative compounding that you don't want. The only thing that will reliably stop and reverse bone loss is resistance training. Of course, eating enough protein, getting enough vitamin d, and eating enough calcium, all those things matter. But these things alone aren't going to transform your bone density. Mechanical stress caused by your muscles contracting at near maximum intensity trigger bone remodeling and stimulate the growth of bone cells to build bone tissue and increase bone density. Everyday living like walking, lifting your grandchildren, or carrying groceries is not enough. You need to be doing resistance training with more added weights. Resistance training is something that will transform your body unlike anything else because it increases lean contractile tissue which makes you stronger, denser and more formidable. You might get away with not doing resistance ring before your forties or even in your forties, but after the age of 50, your bone density due to aging will naturally decline quite rapidly especially for women after menopause. And this declining bone density will increase your risk of hip fractures at the age of 70 and beyond. Here's a quick way to know if you have low bone density. Get a DEXA scan. It costs only around a $100, and it can tell you what's your bone density and muscle mass. The higher your z score, the higher your bone density in standard deviations above or below the norm for your age. You can't get high bone density by just going to the gym once a year, not even once a month. Ideally you want to be doing resistance training at least two to three times per week and keep doing it for decades. Social relationships are something hard to quantify, but they play a huge role in your happiness and longevity. The quality of your relationships has been seen to be the biggest predictor of your life satisfaction. It's undoubtedly true that social relationships require a lot of nurturing and the longer you're friends with someone the more you tend to cherish that friendship and the better it is for your mental health. Not always but typically. Unfortunately with age people spend less time with their friends and family and more time alone. That's going to have a negative effect on your mental health and happiness. So social relationships need frequent dollar cost averaging for lack of a better word to nurture them over the course of decades. Relationships that last for decades are more meaningful and higher quality than relationships that last for a few months or a year. Here's what you can do to compound your social capital. Spend time with your spouse or family every day. Maybe you can't meet them in person but talk with them online or call them. Small things like this compound over time. Do fun activities like going on trips, long walks, dinners, etcetera. You should do this with your best friends as well. Go on a trip or some celebration a few times a year. If you have children then try to develop a good relationship with them and stay in touch because after your children move out you'll spend an insignificant amount of time with them compared to before. You don't want them to leave the house and never talk to you again or meet them only once a year for Christmas. Maintaining good cognition has to start early in life because it takes a long time to build your cognitive reserve. Cognitive reserve refers to your brain's ability to withstand decline in cognition that happens with aging and maintain good cognitive faculties as you get older. Basically, being able to be mentally sharp and intelligent at an old age. Higher cognitive reserve has been seen to be associated with better cognition, fewer functional difficulties, and higher quality of life. How do you build cognitive reserve? Research suggests that early life education and a cognitively demanding job throughout your life are the biggest predictors of cognitive reserve later in life. Higher education like a PhD predicts higher cognitive reserve more so than just a high school diploma. You just have to become a lifelong learner. Use your brain or lose it. Educate yourself about new topics. That's the most impactful thing that increases cognitive reserve. Read new information. Fiction or nonfiction doesn't matter. Engage in cognitive problem solving. Sudokus and word puzzles are a good start but you would want something more challenging. Socializing with others increases cognitive reserve. New experiences that require you to pay more attention and force you to adapt are good for the brain. You build your cognitive reserve every day the same way you build your muscles. If you don't use it, you lose it. If you think that you can just retire and not think and not problem solve anymore, then you're gonna head towards dementia later in your seventies and eighties. Heart disease is the number one killer in the world and it takes decades to develop. You're not gonna get heart disease if you live unhealthily for one year unless you're really burning the candle from both ends. But if you do it for twenty to thirty years, you will get heart disease. With heart disease, you want to slow down the process of atherosclerosis which leads to plaque accumulation in the arteries. It's a slow process that takes decades. Unfortunately, every old person will have some plaque due to aging, but you can minimize it by keeping your risk factors low. It's seen that the more risk factors you have for heart disease such as smoking, diabetes, obesity, dyslipidemia, and high blood pressure, the faster you develop atherosclerosis. People with four risk factors get atherosclerosis at a younger age than those with zero or only a single risk factor. Here are the things that compound your risk of heart disease over the course of decades. Smoking. Regular smoking is one of the biggest risk factors for heart disease. Every day you smoke, you're slowly increasing plaque in your arteries. And in your sixties, you're gonna get a heart attack. You should stop immediately. High blood sugar levels damage the blood vessels every day and lead to a faster development of atherosclerosis. You should improve your metabolic health and get normal blood sugar. Obesity usually walks hand in hand with diabetes and high inflammation, which both increase atherosclerosis. The more obese you are, the faster you develop atherosclerosis, so you should lose the extra weight. Chronically high blood pressure damages the blood vessels just like smoking or diabetes. You should get your blood pressure down as quickly as possible. High lipoproteins like Apo b speed up atherosclerosis, especially if you have high inflammation and high blood sugar combined. The more lipoproteins are floating the bloodstream, the higher the likelihood they get stuck in the arterial wall even in the absence of inflammation. By ignoring these risk factors, you're compounding your risk of heart disease in decades. For heart disease risk reduction, you wanna adopt a healthy lifestyle. Don't be overweight, eat a healthy diet, sleep enough, stay physically active, etcetera. For maximum risk reduction, you wanna eat a Mediterranean diet, exercise regularly, minus stress and take the sauna regularly as it's been seen to reduce the risk of heart disease and high blood pressure by over sixty percent. With age your circadian rhythms become more dysfunctional, which worsens your sleep quality and hormones. The way you slow it down is by entraining your circadian clocks. You're teaching your circadian clocks to work like clockwork and synchronized. Misalignment in the circadian rhythms is seen to be associated with many chronic diseases including cancer, heart disease, Alzheimer's, and diabetes. Circadian misalignment also compounds over time. If you're chronically sleep deprived, if you're chronically jet lagged, and with chronically irregular sleeping habits, you're destroying your circadian clocks faster. What you need to do is then train your circadian clocks by getting exposed to bright light preferably sunlight in the morning and block out blue artificial light in the evening. Wear blue blockers, blackout curtains, sleep masks, screen filters and all that thing. Albert Einstein called the compounding effect the eighth wonder of the world because small incremental improvements or small incremental bad habits will compound over time and they're gonna have massive effects on your health. You might not notice skipping a workout or having a cigarette right now, but if you were to span out the difference between someone who is improving their health by 1% every day versus the one who is destroying their health by 1% every day, then you will see an enormous difference. The differences will become apparent only in ten years and beyond. You're not gonna notice a difference in one to two years. If you want to know how to get yourself from average health to top 1% of health with a realistic routine then check out this video next.