What if I told you your heart hasn't age and you can make it younger? An aging heart becomes stiffer, pumps less efficiently and loses its ability to respond to stress. Your max heart rate drops, stroke volume decreases and the blood vessels stiffen. But here's the exciting part. Scientists have discovered a workout that can make your heart up to twenty years younger. It sounds too good to be true but it's true. The 2018 randomized controlled trial took 60 healthy sedentary middle aged people in their fifties and they were randomly assigned to either two years of structured exercise training or a control group that was getting non cardiovascular exercise such as yoga, stretching, balance and flexibility. Those who exercised saw significant improvements in their v o t max, their fitness and overall heart functioning. Their left ventricular chamber stiffness reduced by about 29% and myocardial stiffness decreased by about 20% from baseline, whereas the control group saw no reduction and theirs even increased slightly. The reduction in left ventricular chamber stiffness corresponds to a twenty year reversal in the structure of the heart. They reverted back to the stiffness of a 35 year old which was twenty years younger than the chronological age of mid fifties. While it's just one marker, it's quite impressive. And if I was in my fifties, I would definitely want to get a heart of a 35 year old. So what was their workout? For the first one to two months, they just acclimated to working out and they did three times thirty minutes steady state cardio per week at 60 to 75% of their max heart rate. During months three to ten, they introduced high intensity interval training. Specifically the four by four Norwegian protocol. Four times four minutes at 90 to 95% max heart rate. Three minutes of active recovery between the intervals and one to two sessions per week. By month six, their weekly workout plan looks like this. Two times interval sessions the four by four hit. One time long base sessions over sixty minutes at the lower intensity. One moderate base session of thirty minutes. Two strength training sessions targeting core and whole body. And one recovery slash walking day. Months eleven to twenty four, they maintained their training load and reduced HIIT to one session per week. However, they continued aerobic training and resistance training. That's a pretty solid workout and I think that everyone can do it. Those who exercised saw an 18% increase in their VO2max max from 29 milliliters per kilogram per minute to 34.4. Their aerobic capacity and overall fitness improved significantly. Whereas the control group who did no cardiovascular exercise saw slight age related decline in their v o two max from 29.5 to 28.7 and their fitness decreased. An increase in VO2 Max by 18% isn't that significant especially after two years of training. And especially given the fact that their baseline where they started from was already quite low, but they definitely improved their fitness. It might be that because they were already in their fifties, their body just couldn't increase their VO2 max any further because their VO2 max plateaued already in the middle of the study. However, they also just planned to maintain their fitness after the first year and they did decrease the frequency of high intensity interval training. What it means is that the longer you wait to increase your VO2max the harder it becomes and the less gains you can expect. If you start doing VO2max training in your sixties, seventies or eighties then you'll get far fewer results than someone who started doing it in their thirties. Their left ventricular end diastolic volume index, which reflects the functioning of the left ventricular of the heart, increased by 7.1 milliliters per square meter, whereas the control group saw a decrease of one point zero. So the exercise group saw much better heart functioning. Their resting heart rate also dropped by four to six beats per minute. They saw other improvements in their heart functioning as well. Effective arterial elastance reduced from 2.37 to 2.16 which means their heart had to work less hard. Arterial compliance increased from 1.07 to 1.29, which reflects the elasticity of the arteries. Stroke volume improved and plasma volume and hemoglobin also improved. So overall their heart functioning improved significantly. Whereas the control group who did just stretching and just mobility exercises experienced aging of the heart, their heart health got worse. So what's the magic sauce here? The key component is near maximum exercise such as the four by four Norwegian protocol. It doesn't necessarily have to be that specific protocol, but the key component is taking your heart rate close to its maximum. That's the reason the people who did stretching and mobility didn't experience any benefits. They never raised their heart rate to close to its maximum. It means that to reverse your cardiac age, you need to be doing some form of high intensity interval training. The Norwegian protocol utilizes four minutes at your absolute near peak heart rate, which depends on your age. A standard method to calculate your max heart rate is to subtract your age from two twenty. I'm 31, so my max heart rate based on my age would be a 189. For me, the 90 to 95% of max heart rate is a 170 to a 179 beats per minute. The older you are, the lower your estimated max heart rate is going to be because of aging. But if you're fitter, then your max heart rate can also be higher than expected for your chronological age. It's essentially use it or lose it. If you don't take your heart rate close to its maximum every once in a while, then your max heart rate is just going to decrease, and it means that your heart functioning is getting worse. The reason this HIT protocol reversed cardiac structure is because the hemodynamic load and mechanical stress from a heart beating heart stretches the left ventricular walls. It makes the heart work more efficiently and restructures it, making the heart less stiff. The authors of the study saw that the heart maintains its ability to reverse the stiffness up until the age of 65. After the age of 65, the collagen cross linking becomes more permanent and it becomes harder to reverse the cardiac stiffness. So the younger you start, the better it is. Now the MVP of this study was the four by four Norwegian protocol, but arguably other forms of high intensity interval training can be equally as effective. It's just that this four by four protocol is very commonly known and is also brutally effective. You have to keep doing intervals longer than two minutes in my opinion as this has been shown to be superior for increasing VO to max compared to short intervals of just thirty seconds. So long intervals at least two to four minutes are the best ones that can restructure your heart to a more youthful state. However, this study also utilized low intensity base training to improve overall aerobic fitness. This This can be called zone two training at a lower intensity. Zone two probably had less of a role in restructuring the heart and lowering cardiac age, but it's still important for building a solid aerobic base, so you should do both forms of training. Introducing zone two and HIIT cardio to my workouts improved my own health and fitness tremendously, making me go from top 20% to top 1% of health. Check out my video about all the other things I did for this next.