I'm not gonna talk about the obvious habits that you should follow like exercise, eat clean and sleep. Instead, I'll focus on the small mini habits that over the long term will have significant effects on your health and well-being. Number one, sleep with a silk sleep mask. One of the hidden things that messes up your sleep and circadian rhythms is artificial light in your bedroom. It's been seen that even moderate light exposure during sleep increases night time heart rate, reduces heart rate variability and increases next morning insulin resistance compared to a very dim or no light. That's why the healthiest sleep is in pitch black darkness. Having a sleep mask is very useful especially if you're in a hotel room with all different blue lights shining throughout the night. A silk sleep mask specifically is the best thing for your sleep because you won't be rubbing these polyester and other microplastics into your face and eyeballs. Most regular sleep masks are kinda cheap. They use polyester and other artificial synthetic materials. Those ingredients are actually also harmful for your skin health. They're gonna make your eyes look more puffy. Whereas silk is very natural material. It's actually good for your skin. It's more smooth. Your eyes are gonna look much better in the morning. Number two, exercise snacks. Exercise is obviously good for you but you don't have to go to the gym for many hours nor should you just exercise and sit on a couch for the rest of the day. This is where exercise snacks come into play. You basically take a one minute break to get your heart rate elevated by running up the stairs, doing jumping jacks, sprinting, or whatever else. In a 2022 clinical trial, three times a day of one minute exercise snacks has been seen to reduce the risk of all cause mortality by thirty eight to forty percent and cardiovascular disease mortality by forty eight to forty nine percent compared to no vigorous daily activity. The benefits were even greater in those who took up up to 10 to 11 bouts of exercise snacks yielding a fifty five percent reduction in all cause mortality risk. However, the benefits started to plateau after three to four exercise snacks. Basically, you want to have at least three of these exercise snacks spread throughout the day. It can be anything, run up the stairs, do jumping jacks, do a sprint, push ups whatever it is to get your heart rate elevated. Number three, block out blue light at night. I already alluded to this with a sleep mask but you should start blocking out artificial light already before you go to bed. Basically, this blue light from screens and phones is disrupting your melatonin production by tricking your brain into thinking that it's daytime. Artificial light exposure at night is linked to obesity, diabetes, cancer, heart disease, depression and many other health problems. To mitigate that you would want to wear some of these blue looking glasses in different colors. Make sure that it's at least this orange or yellow tint, not the see through. Alternatively, you can use dim incandescent light bulbs or pink Himalayan salt lamps to shift the spectrum of light to more amber and red. The only acceptable light before bed is the red or amber light. Number four, swap plastics for stainless steel. One of the best swaps in your kitchen you can make is swap your non stick cookware like teflon for stainless steel. The Teflon and non stick cookware is going to leach microplastics into your foods that then accumulates into your body. The stainless steel on the other hand is not going to leach iron, it's not going to leach microplastics or anything like that. It's just stainless steel. It's the best pan for cooking. Instead of a plastic or silicone spatula use a wooden or steel one. I wanna take a quick break to tell you about the bond charge infrared sauna blankets. My go to way of getting twenty minutes sauna sessions on the go without needing to spend an hour to warm up a regular sauna. Taking a sauna is in my opinion one of the best things for your overall health and heart function. Studies show that taking a sauna regularly is associated with sixty three percent lower risk of sudden cardiac death, sixty three percent reduced heart disease mortality, forty six percent lower risk of hypertension, and forty percent reduced all cause mortality. This is mediated by an increase in body temperature and increased heart rate that mimic a cardiovascular workout while at the same time improving arterial stiffness, endothelial function, blood flow, immune system function, blood pressure, and metabolic health. It doesn't matter if it's a traditional wooden sauna and infrared sauna and infrared sauna blanket or anything else that elevate your body temperature above what's normal. Boncharged infrared sauna blankets have the advantage of shining far infrared light that can penetrate deeper into your tissues than regular saunas can. It warms up in two minutes to the optimal temperature of 70 degrees Celsius and it's low in EMF. There's also no plastic in the material so you're not swelling in plastic. You can get a 15% discount by heading over to boncharge.com/seamlund and use the code seam for 15% discount. Alright. Back to the video. Number five, collagen. I'll add collagen because it's effective for slowing down skin aging and collagen content starts decreasing in the skin already in your twenties by about 10% per decade. There are also clinical trials showing that collagen peptides increase skin elasticity by up to 21% and reduce wrinkles. That's why adding about ten grams of collagen peptides into your daily routine can be a game changer for skin aging especially if you start early. Number six. Air filtration and fresh air. Air pollution outside is becoming a big concern in some of the most densely populated regions of the world and big cities. However, did you know that poor indoor air kills three million people every year? Now most of it is in poor countries where people use open fires or they burn coal or wood inside their houses. But there are also many innocent indoor air pollution sources that can slowly over the course of a long time damage your health. Candles are open fires that burn particulate matter especially if they're artificially made candles. They'll also spread these microplastics and other hormone disruptors. Cooking with gas is bad because it emits carbon monoxide especially if you cook a lot in long durations. Open fireplaces and wood stoves also emit carbon monoxide. Volatile organic compounds from wall paint, air fresheners, glues, and cleaning products. House mold, dust, and moldy bacteria can be really bad for your immune system and inflammation status. That's why it's important to first identify if your building has house mold and try to get rid of it. Then you also have to consider which type of cooking you do and if you have a gas stove or an open fireplace. If you do, then keep the windows open and ventilate the room properly during use. Lastly, using air filters can be great but you shouldn't use ozone generators or ionizers because excess ozone can also be harmful. Instead, if you get an air filtration system, get a hepa filter or an activated carbon filter. By improving your indoor air quality, you should feel more energy, you should have less inflammation, you should have less allergies, you should be able to breathe better and sleep better, and your face will look less puffy. Alternatively, you want to spend at least some time of the day or at least a few days of the week outside in a forested area. The trees and plants produce oxygen and they purify the air. Number seven, next we have water filtration which is also quite important. Unless you live in the countryside with your own well or spring water, your water is probably not the best for drinking. Of course, most industrial countries have clean drinking water that is drinkable. However, regular tap water tends to have some heavy metals, forever chemicals or microplastics because of the piping system. If you live in an old building with old pipes that have corroded over time, your water will be higher in lead and other metals than what's optimal. Over time, if you drink several liters per day, it can start to have a negative effect on your health. The gold standard for water filtration is the reverse osmosis filters that cost a few $100. It's not crazy expensive, but it's not cheap either. Countertop filters that are good include Berkey or Brita, but Berkey water filters are in metal jugs, whereas Brita is in plastic. Berkey's cost around 400 to $500, whereas Brita is only 100. Which option is best for you depends on your budget and the quality of your tap water. The last habit is morning bright light exposure preferably from sunlight. Yes. Artificial light before bed can mess up your circadian rhythms but the same applies to the morning if you're not exposed to bright lights or the sunlight. The morning sunlight is a signal to your brain that it's daytime and it synchronizes your body's hormones, metabolic processes, and epigenetics. This makes it literally the most important thing you should do in the morning because your circadian rhythms control virtually every process inside your body. Morning light exposure has been seen to improve mood and sleep in the evening. It doesn't matter if it's cloudy, the sunlight will still pass through the clouds and it's still much brighter than indoor light. You just wanna spend five minutes outside getting exposed to this bright light. These are kinda small habits that have a pretty big upside. However, they're not going to be nearly as important as the fundamentals of diet, exercise, sleep, etcetera. You can check out my full evidence based longevity routine next.