Again, I think anyone that's barking that, like, this is good or bad for every human, they clearly don't know what they're talking about because we are all very different. I think that and vitamin d, I think those are the top two most wrongly demonized supplements. Does everyone need high doses? No. Of course not. But the same exact thing that healed you is rarely what keeps you healthy. Tyler, welcome to the show. Thank you so much for having me, my man. Yeah. I'm, very excited to have you because you cover something that tends to go a little bit under the radar in, health information, which is, you know, the bio individuality and how your genes affect how you respond to different foods and supplements and those kind of things, which you know many people kind of know already, but in the health space there's always tends to be like this one size fits all solution to all the problems out there, but the reality is that it's a lot more nuanced and complex than that. So, yeah, I'm excited to, have a discussion with you about it. Yeah. You know, it's one of those things that there's there's an overabundance of people, especially on social media now, right, that can say or regurgitate, you know, the information that you read on the supplement label, right, or on the bottle or, you know, we know this supplement helps with inflammation, this or that, but what else is it doing in the body? Right? I'm sure you know this. You know, every supplement or nutrient has many mechanisms, and we really need to also make sure that not just that mechanisms serve us, but not that some of those mechanisms don't also, you know, have deleterious or negative effects on our, physiology. Mhmm. Yeah. Maybe you can also talk a little bit about how you got into this and what's your, like, backstory because it's quite interesting how you, like, you know, stumbled upon this, field yourself. Yeah. Absolutely. So, always really loved science. I actually, wanted to be the next crocodile hunter when I was a kid. So really loved the animals. Steve Irwin was, you know, my idol. Rest in peace. So when it came to biology, I always loved biology, but it was more we'll call it the macrobiology. Right? More like animal biology. I think it was eleventh grade. I took biology, and we talked about cells and just so fascinating that it's like we have a whole city or a world inside of each one of our cells. All these organelles, all these proteins doing these things. So I did my undergrad, at University of South Florida in molecular and cellular biology. Love the molecular side, really got into supplements, biohacking, was making my own pre workout in my dorm room and, you know, like, selling that at the school gym and stuff, you know, and just how you can oh, I put, you know, this stimulant in there. I'm way more anxious than if I just take caffeine. You know, really interesting. All these little things, how I can make myself more calm if I wanna be more calm based on what I put in my body or more energized. I, was trying to figure out what to do after that. And ironically enough, I didn't wanna work with people directly. I don't wanna be a doctor, people yelling at me for, you know, drugs or this or that. And pharmacy, I didn't really wanna be yelled at for, again, medications and stuff. And one of my professors mentioned pharmacology and, you know, the questions I would ask, I think you do well in research, looked up what pharmacology was, and I'm like, this is literally me. Ironic I didn't realize what pharmacology was until end of undergrad, but knowing the why. I looked out on my coffee, and I'm like, oh, so it doesn't magically wake me up. There's a molecule that blocks a receptor, which blocks the tired signal, so that's why I'm awake. Right? So knowing the why there. I, decided to do a PhD right out undergrad in pharmacology, and I did, some stem cell work, anxiety work, end up doing my thesis work on breast cancer, breast cancer metastasis. And I I remember a period of poor health. You know, I've dealt with, you know, anxiety, brain fog, sleep issues, and I got my 23 and me done. And this was probably seven, eight years ago, and I thought I was gonna change my life, all these great insights. And back then, '23 and me was not what it is now, and it was, like, more likely to think cilantro tastes like soap or more likely to have your pee smell weird when you eat asparagus. And I'm like, that's cool, but that's not really gonna impact my health. So I looked in the raw data myself, figured out some of my mutations, and was able to do targeted supplementation. Doctors wanna put me on medications for some of these things, and I changed my life within a matter of days or, you know, a week or two. And that's when I decided I wanna be in personalized medicine. So after I graduated, I worked at an oncology company doing next generation sequencing, analysis for about a year and a half, started doing what I do now, working with people one on one, started my business, and it's been a little over two years since I've been doing that full time, worked with over 700 people. And, here we are now just trying to bridge the gap between not just conventional medicine and holistic medicine, but also really ways of awareness. I think genetics are very undervalued by how we analyze them clinically. And the supplement pharmacology, I mean, you know this. It's like the wild west out there. Thank god they have people like you or me that can help cut some of the noise, but there's a lot of BS out there. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. You know? Even starting with the fact that most supplements aren't regulated and, you know, you're not really sure what you're getting unless, it's actually a purity tested and third party tested. But, yeah, I mean, you mentioned that, mixing your preworkouts and stuff, like, that's, you know, essentially, like, what bodybuilders are do did several decades ago is what, you know, biohackers are doing now. Or Yep. Yeah. Like, pharmacology is, like, what bio bodybuilders are, like, specialized in. So it's very interesting that a lot of a lot of people who are in in this field, have, like, this history of, you know, kind of a bro bodybuilding, age. Exactly. You know, I got included. Yeah. And, like, you know, I I I love, like, following the work of, like, you familiar with, like, Milos Larchev? Mhmm. Yeah. Like, he he he was a really big pioneer, really, like, science based and, you know, with the pharmacology stuff, you're totally right. Right? And it's it's interesting when it comes to biohacking, a very immediate readout you could get is how well you perform in the gym. Right? Like, that could be, you know, you take some, you know, you take some beta alanine or you take you could feel that difference that very day on that workout. Right? You could really tell what's working or not. So, yeah, I never thought about it that way. There are a lot of people do have that more bro background, but then adding that education, right, to know the why underneath. Yeah. So so maybe we are we can maybe start with, the kind of, those supplements in the physical performance area. Most specifically probably, like, caffeine that, has, like, a huge genetic component. And there's famously, like, these slow metabolizers and fast metabolizers of caffeine that some people, like, burn through it very fast and others get, you know, sleep problems even from a single cup of coffee. So, yeah, like, what can you tell us, let's say, maybe about caffeine supplements or even caffeine alone as well? Yeah. So, you know, a lot of people talk about that sit metabolism, right, for the caffeine breakdown. And there's different, you know, mechanisms or layers to any interaction to any substance or supplement. So that's absolutely true how quickly or slowly you metabolize the caffeine molecule. There's also things like how quickly you metabolize the adrenaline or the neurotransmitters that caffeine makes you release. So, certain mutations like the COMT gene or MAO gene, these can affect how quickly you break down dopamine and adrenaline. So I have a double slow COMT mutation. That was actually the first gene I figured out for myself years ago, and it made a lot of sense why I'm very go go go extroverted type a prone to stress because I'm just sensitive. Right? A lot of that dopamine adrenaline sensitive to caffeine as well. There's also some really cool, mutations in the adenosine receptor itself. So there's how much of the molecule is floating around for how long. There's how tightly it binds to the adenosine receptor. So if that receptor itself is mutated in a certain way, those people, it doesn't affect the serum levels of caffeine or the metabolism, but it actually affects the responsiveness. So people with that mutation, they are more prone to anxiety because the caffeine molecule can bind it more strongly. So, I mean, just right there, there's three different things to juggle. Right? Like, sometimes I'll work with people. They don't metabolize caffeine slowly, but they're very sensitive to it. Right? So there's a lot of different alternatives out there to these xanthine type molecules. Dynamine is is one. Tea cream, paraxanthine, these are all very similar in structure there. Have you tried any of those? I've tried the paraxanthin. Yeah. How'd you like that one? Yeah. I mean, I I took it when I was about Sean Wells gave it to me when I was before going on a stage to speak, but, you know, I I had caffeine, a few hours before that there as well, so I don't know exactly if Yeah. How it affected. But, yeah, I mean, I drank this drink with the baroxanthine, and, yeah, I mean, I I did, I guess, feel a little bit more fluent with, words. Yeah. You know, I I tried it on its own. It's one of I realized for myself, I like it. It's one of those things that I still like having. I'll lower my caffeine dosage. I'll, like, do a quarter of the dose with a little bit. Just personally, I it's all about, you know, you wanna be calm, cool, collected, but sometimes it's good to have a little bit of that punch. Right? So you actually wanna get these things done. Right? But, yeah, it could go depends how deep you wanna go. Right? Because, technically, you also have the GABA system. If that's not working as well, you could be more anxious from caffeine. Right? Serotonin, it goes on and on. To me, it's everything can affect everything. Right? But depends how deep you wanna go with that. But, yeah, I've seen a lot of people really benefit from the theacrine. So theacrine is a longer acting. If you guys don't know, it's a longer acting, more mild form of caffeine. It's still naturally plant based from the same family of plants, but when I work with people that have that adenosine receptor mutations, they respond really well to that. They're like, this is what caffeine should feel like. I feel peppy, but not my heart's beating out of my chest. Mhmm. I think Dynamine's a shorter acting one they use in a lot of pre workouts. I like that one a lot, and that that I'll use sometimes. I normally train first thing in the morning, but if I'm training midday, you can kind of it could come in and come out really quick in the body. Right? You're not worried about it really affecting the sleep. Yeah. Unfortunately, like, a fast metabolizer, like, I can drink coffee for dinner and still fall asleep quite easily. But I do notice that if I take, like, pre workout that has caffeine, then, that tends to, like, put me over the edge a little bit with sleep. Like, if I if it my I I my my dose daily dose limit is something like maybe three hundred milligrams. If I go, like, above that, then I start to have some sleep issues, but I usually, yeah, metabolize it, quite fast. Other than that, I also like to combine it with, like, theanine. That's, very like, this classic nootropic snack that you combine coffee with a theanine, like, two hundred milligrams or something, and that kinda, like, helps to smooth it out a little bit. Yeah. They put that in a lot of preworkouts now too. Mhmm. And, you know, like, the, a lot of people too, you know, aren't aware about all these other I call them adrenaline boosters. So caffeine, we know raise dumps adrenaline, but you also have so many ingredients in preworkouts that also boost adrenaline. You know, whether it's an l tyrosine or an l dopa, those are giving your body more ingredients to make adrenaline. But a lot of people aren't aware of a lot of these inhibitors of the COMT or MAO gene. So, basically, it's like imagine if your adrenaline was in a bathtub and there's only one drain, and you could plug the drain with these supplements. Right? So things like the rhodiola rosea or things like the astrologist roots. Yohimbe doesn't dump adrenaline, but it mimics adrenaline. So I I realized really quick, which before I knew what I knew, which, pre workout would really just send me over the edge. And, you know, I'm really vocal about there's so many other supplements out there that also block these genes. So things like like methylene blue, whole list of benefits. I've seen it really mess people up because they get so overstimulated and anxious. I can't really tolerate any of that. I mean, I have maybe maybe fifty milligrams of caffeine a day at this point just because of all the other stuff, you know, like, whether it's NMN, this or that. These are stimulatory. Right? I gotta be very mindful of the overall energy sources, but, you know, people will take a thyroid supplement that has tyrosine, astragalus root, licorice root Mhmm. And they wonder why they're losing their marbles because they're jacking up this adrenaline, and there's just not enough education. Like, when you a lot of natural supplements for brain health or joint health or gut health, they have a lot of similar ingredients to some preworkouts. They don't have the caffeine Yeah. But they have the other things. So you have caffeine in the morning. You have your cup of coffee. You take some of these supplements. No wonder why you're overstimulated, but you can't really figure out why. And maybe you have to take a bunch of calming supplements or I've even seen some people have to go on medication. We remove these supplements that are raising adrenaline. They don't need that medication anymore. Right. Yeah. Like, uppers and downers, like, vicious cycle and fixing the things from the side effects from other things. Another, like, popular workout supplement is, you know, creatine, and, there's a lot of, like, fears and misconceptions about creatine, but there's also, yeah, some people who might not do well with it. So what do you know about creatine? Yeah. Creatine, I mean, I think it's definitely the most well studied one we have. Right? Like, it is so many bodies of evidence, not just for muscle strength performance. I saw you made a post. I made a post too about the the sleep deprivation side of stuff. Right? I just made a post about, topical creatine for skin health. There's some early data for, I think what? It might have been Parkinson's, some neurodegenerative disorder. It helps you make ATP. Right? And I think it is a very safe supplement for all to try and experiment with. But, you know, what are the risks here? You know, GI upset, that's probably the most common one. But that's, you know, you may have to try maybe a micronized creatine. I mean, person I mean, what do you think? I think monohydrate's decaying still based on the data we see. Yeah. Yeah. That's usually what I recommend. Micronized can be a bit better for the GI. You know, they shown with doesn't really affect the kidneys. But one interesting thing is that creatine is also a methyl donor, meaning people talk about MTHFR, right, and methylation. Well, you need methylation to make creatine. So if you need to methylate to make creatine, that means it's a methyl group, meaning certain people that are sensitive. So these they it helps let me put it this way. The reason why it could help with mental health is that it has methyl groups that can help you make more neurotransmitters. Right? It could help you make more ATP for cellular energy, which is huge for brain health, but also it can help you make neurotransmitters by donating that methyl group. Now what else does methylation do? Methylation also helps us convert norepinephrine into epinephrine. So yeah. Was it dopamine to norepinephrine or epine yeah. Norepinephrine to epinephrine to help you make adrenaline. So for people that are sensitive to adrenaline like me, it can make people feel overstimulated or anxious. So some people say they get super anxious from it. It it could be because it's too much methyl groups for you. Maybe you're taking too much methylfolate, methyl b twelve. I mean, so many people are overdosing on those two nowadays. Right? Just with all the, MTHFR stuff. But, there's that and, you know, people talk about the DHT aspect too for the hair loss aspect. I mean, correct me if I'm wrong. I I've seen, I think, one or two studies that it can raise DHT, but I haven't seen any studies actually conclusively linking it to that DHT leading to that hair loss. Yeah. Like, there was this one study that found that giving these athletes even, like, yeah, they did, like, a loading phase with creatine, something like twenty grams for five days and then five grays for two weeks five grams for two weeks or something like that, and they did see that, yeah, like, there was an increase in DHT levels. But, yeah, they didn't, you know, they didn't measure hair loss or anything like that in the study. So people, you know, jumped the conclusion that, okay, they had increased DHT, then therefore, it means that creatinine causes hair loss. But, yeah, there's no study that actually has replicated that and, no study actually looking at if creatinine causes hair loss or or not. And in that study, I think I remember that the baseline DHT levels in those individuals was already lower. So, yeah, creatinine increases DHT, but if, you know, you were coming from baseline, yeah, there's gonna be a, relatively speaking, a big percentage increase, but, it didn't reach super physiological level kind of. It didn't go above normal from creatinine. So, yeah, it's kind of a, you know, interesting, many people anecdotally say that they take creatinine and they experience hair loss, but I personally have haven't seen any studies kind of actually proving that. Yeah. And that's a really good point you just brought up. Right? It's about how high are you going. Right? Where where are you starting from? Where are you ending at? And, you know, this is a concept I'm really vocal about is when you think about these studies for any clinical study, they get a bunch of people, and they run the study. They don't check to see well, that study checked the DHT initially. That's a good starting point. Right? But most studies don't. So I've worked with people. I've seen it firsthand. Creatine caused hair loss in certain individuals, but guess what? Those individuals had mutations for higher DHT. Right? So they were already starting out in that Right. Area. And the way we study these things is kinda it's kinda flawed in certain ways because you can't just get a bunch of people with all different levels of baseline DHT and then see if creatine does that. Right? I feel that if you structure studies where you actually put higher risk people in the study, you would get more negative effects. Right? But it's kinda like we try to do a study where we get a smorgasbord, a blend of different people, throw them all in a study. Oh, it does or doesn't do this for humans. But for some humans, it can, and that's kinda how my brain looks at. You know? Of course, I read peer reviewed studies, but I take all of them with a grain of salt because I work one on one, not one to many. So whoever's in front of me So I have seen the creatine contribute to hair loss for people with higher DHT levels. So if you're I think if you're someone that you know has high DHT levels, then and you are trying to keep your hair, I do think that could potentially be worth being mindful of, but, again, you could also combine it with things that lower DHT. Right? Like the saw palmetto or reishi mushroom. So you can enjoy the benefits of the creatine. So the Mhmm. The DHT goes up, but you could also kinda lower it a little bit. And what do you know? Reishi is also great for a lot of immune and exercise things as well. It's like a two for one. So kinda, you know, how my brain works. You wanna enjoy all the benefits. Like, imagine if you don't eat a lot of red meat and you're low on creatine, but you're high in DHT. Right? How do you kinda work around that? That's where using the right, you know, team of nutrients can really make all the difference. Yeah. Yeah. It depends a lot, yeah, like, your baseline DHT and, you know, it's not the one it's another common biomarker or a lab marker that people measure. So you they would have to, like, specifically measure it, which takes, you know, again, more effort and more money and more time. But, I mean, if they even check it. Right? A lot of doctors will just say it's not even important, and you and you believe them. Right? Yeah. Yeah. I mean and it's, you know, again, how how much, yeah, people actually do to see if something causes it or not because, you know, some we're we're not, like, perfect scientific machines, the human mind. Like, we're not far from it. Yeah. We're we're not, like, able to control for all the confounding variables in our heads. Like, okay. I I'm aware of how much calories I ate. I'm aware of my DHT levels before taking creatine, etcetera. Like, we're we're not perfect. Like, you can't you can't sit there and be like, I I could feel the DHT right now. Right? Like yeah. Yeah. So, yeah, in a perfect world, you would, yeah, like, have all this information before making those decisions, but, you know, most people, don't, do it. And in a lot of cases, you might not need it, but, you know, if there are some things that puzzle you or, are causing problems, then, yeah, you would need to, you know, do further testing and and see what's the actual issue. Yep. I wanna take a quick break to let you know that you can now get my new book, The Longevity Leap on Amazon. It contains 24 chapters ranging from the biology of aging to all the major chronic diseases such as heart disease, kidney disease, neurodegeneration, and I also cover over 70 clinically relevant biomarkers for chronic diseases and their optimal ranges. You can get the book from the link in the description. Any other, like, workout supplements, I think there's a lot of, like, these pump increases, like, let's say, citrulline or arginine and those things. Are there any, like, genetic effects on those? Yeah. So, you know, yeah, there are there are a lot of mutations that could indicate a higher need for specifically arginine or for specifically l citrulline. And, you know, it's not it's not always just talking about the one gene. Right? It's all about something called polygenic risk score. I'm sure you're familiar with it, but for you guys listening, that's poly meaning many, genic meaning genes. It's not just if you have a higher need sorry. Not if you have one mutation. So I'm looking right here. I'm curious the I forgot how much. Just for the, I'm curious to see real quick the citrulline report I have here. I'm just looking real quick to see how many, just to give you an idea. Yeah. So 11,245 SNPs went into analyzing your overall need for citrulline. So you see how it's a lot deeper than just saying you have one gene. You need more citrulline. Right? Even for some people, for myself, I respond really well to agmatine sulfate. So agmatine is a metabolite, you know, of arginine, and that step that metabolizes, that creates arginine sorry, that creates agmatine, mine doesn't work very well. So I switched from arginine to agmatine, and I noticed massive differences. I have, a couple mute several mutations in that Nos three gene. So that's the gene that synthesizes nitric oxide. So it's funny. I've been bodybuilding, I don't know, for, what, fifteen plus years at this point. And maybe two, three years ago, I found out about this mutation. I tried I switched I tried arginine, then I switched to agmatine. Bro, I was like, oh my I just stopped working out. My arms are gonna explode. Like, I've never. Now I understood what a pump really was, if that makes sense. Right? And I'm like, I feel like I wasted my time all these years, right, not getting that proper blood flow. But, yeah, again, when you map out, you need more nitric oxide. But which step do you need more nitric oxide for? Do you need more arginine or agmatine or citrulline? Or there's things like picinogenol from the pine bark extract that also can raise nitric oxide. Right? So it's like there's all these ways you can help with insert whatever you wanna work on. But for any one thing you wanna improve on, there's countless natural things to do it. How do you know which nitric oxide booster you need? That's where the genetics really come into play and can really fine tune these things. It doesn't mean I get zero benefit from arginine. Right? But for people that are struggling and things aren't working or people that really wanna min max things, you know, I think genetic testing is really undervalued in a lot of ways. What about people who have, like, some cardiovascular risk, with those people then, like, benefit more from these, Inno boosters? Yeah. Absolutely. So it's it's interesting too. It's like, you know, people people like to think in terms of labels or diagnoses, meaning, you know, oh, I have this nos three gene mutation. That's why I have erectile dysfunction. Right? Because nitric oxide helps with blood flow. Well, it's also linked to like, what does nitric oxide do in the body overall? Right? It's also linked to neurotransmission, so brain health effects. It's also linked to preeclampsia. It's also linked to cardiovascular risk. So, yes, people that have these nos three mutations, the higher blood pressure. Right? All these different things, and that's why it's, you know, the same thing that helps with erectile dysfunction can help you get a better pump at the gym, can lower your blood pressure, can help with histamine. Right? But we're trained a lot to think in terms of just that one angle. You know? If you're a heart doctor, you only think of it from that angle. Like, people asking, what's a good, you know, what's a good brain health supplement? Well, you know, let's just take, let's take glycine. I know you love glycine. It's probably my favorite. I know it's one of your favorites. I think it's it's one of my favorite, longevity molecules as well. And it's good for brain health, but it's good for everything else too. Because when you take a supplement, it doesn't just go to your brain. Right. It nourishes every cell in your body. All of your cells have receptors or they uptake or trans or absorb these nutrients. And depending on the cell type in your body, it's gonna respond differently. You know? A joint cell is gonna respond differently to a brain cell versus a skin cell. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. You know, speaking of glycine, then, I, like, respond very well to it. Like, I don't have any symptoms and negative side effects. You know, a lot of the studies, they're, like, ninety grams a day, also without side effects. But there's also a lot of people comment often that they take glycine and they get, like, headache or insomnia or nausea or something like that even at low doses. So what do you think, that could be? Yeah. So, yeah, I I respond really well as well. What what's what's your normal daily dose? Just curious. I take maybe, like, ten grams, something like that Yeah. Plus three grams from collagen, so thirteen grams Nice. Approximately. Yeah. Yeah. I'm I'm I usually hover around that, like, seven seven to eight ish range somewhere around there. Yeah. I love that stuff, and it's it's an added bonus. It tastes so delicious. Right? Like, I love I love mixing that at night into there. It literally tastes like sugar. Mhmm. But yeah. So, you know, one of the things glycine does, it's a coagonist at the NMDA receptor. So, this is a receptor for neurotransmission for how we, you know, feel and how we behave. And it's a coagonist, meaning glutamate is an excitatory neurotransmitter, and it revs up the brain. But it also helps with memory. Like, we need we need it. Right? But too much can be a bad thing. Now without glycine or I think serine on either end, glutamate can't activate the receptor. When you activate it, it stimulates you. Magnesium blocks it. That's why it chills you out. Ketamine blocks it. That's why it's pretty much a tranquilizer. Right? So the I think for some people, they have mutations in that NMDA receptor. So well, not that I think. I I've seen this. They have mutations in this NMDA receptor, and theirs might be extra sensitive, more overactive. So the glycine can help stimulate the receptor, but if you're more sensitive to glutamate or if you have more glutamate floating around in the brain, it can lead to those symptoms. Because, again, you know, if instead of labels, we think in terms of pathways, excess glutamate, whether it's mutations in glutamate signaling or excess glutamate or symptoms from too much glutamine, which gets converted into glutamate, all the same symptoms. Right? The headaches, the anxiety, the insomnia. So, yeah, that's that's one, you know, I'm trying to think. That's not as I don't see that super commonly in people I work with, and glycine's one of those things that even if you don't have a higher genetic need for glycine, I will utilize it a lot of times just since a lot of us aren't eating. We're not consuming enough. Right? Like, when's the last time someone ate a bone or tendon or a sinew? Right? Unless you're doing a lot of bone broth or unless you're doing, you know, a lot of, nose to tail carnivore, you're gonna be missing out on a lot of that glycine. Yeah. Like, I don't see it also, like, a lot, these symptoms in people or the but whenever I post about glycine, there's at least, like, one or two comments Yeah. About it. So there's a segment of people that do Yeah. Respond. And, yeah, like, you know, I think even, like, you would need to consume, like, tons of bone broth or these bones to actually get the adequate amounts of glycine from, from the dietary sources. Like, I don't even know how much you would need to consume, but, I mean, if you eat, like, pork rinds, probably, like, you can get it. Like, a 100 grams of pork rinds has, like, 20 grams of glycine. That's a lot of pork rinds. Yeah. And then you have then you have the other issue of the extra extra calories, exercise your fat, and those things. So Yeah. Can be a issue. So And and and, you know, too, you know, one last thing with the glycine too. Like, you you you you mentioned a good point there. Like, the and the the bone broth too, you know, that's also high in glutamate. It's also very high in histamine. Mhmm. That roasting process, all of the histidine is gonna get converted into histamine in the body. That's also excitatory. Like, I cannot tolerate bone broth. I get headaches, anxious, don't sleep well. I see that with a lot of people I work with. They they think they're doing the right thing having bone broth. Well, it can it does help with a lot of things. Right? But, again, what else does it do? If you're very sensitive to histamine or if you're very sensitive to glutamate, they may be a no go for you. Right? And not that it's bad for everyone. But, yeah, I feel this same way. Glycine, I talk about it a lot, but there's always a couple of those people there. And, yeah, sometimes, you know, magnesium's huge. Magnesium can help with that. Usually, people that are more sensitive to it, if they're magnesium deficient, it makes it a lot worse. So sometimes people can tolerate a gram or two is better than zero, right, if they do have that adamant, magnesium content. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. The bone broth you mentioned is there. Yeah. Another very popular, these, sensitivities, the histamine. So there are a lot of fermented foods, just aged food, if your food has been sitting in the even in the fridge for a few days, it has more. This histamines that, yeah, can be problematic for a lot of people. Like, that's why, you know, fermented foods aren't, like, very beneficial for, you know, even, like, a lot of people. Yeah. And it's really interesting too that, a lot of Eastern Asian populations, they have better genetics for gut histamine breakdown. So it's really interesting, like, called evolution, if you will, or something. Right? Like, we get a lot of fermented foods from Asian culture. Right? And ironically enough, they're the best genetically equipped to be able to enjoy the benefits, but not absorb all that histamine into their system. The histamine is a huge overlooked factor as well. Like, I'll just give you example how easy it is for people to overload on histamine. A lot of people will work with their morning routine. They'll they'll be fasting, right, which has its pros and cons, depends on the person, etcetera. But they wake up in the morning, they have black coffee, freshly roasted, high in histamine. They have apple cider vinegar in the morning Mhmm. High in histamine. Then they go to the gym. Exercise stimulates histamine release. They feel horrible after the gym. They're off the whole day because you just overloaded so much histamine into your body. Now I'm not saying those are bad. You'll never hear me say something straight up bad. Right? But who would have thought it was the coffee, apple cider vinegar that was, like, making you feel No. Worse. And, of course, then there's the the the fermented stuff as well. You know? The kimchi, a lot of these things are good for the gut, but if you have histamine issues, it could be deleterious for you. Yeah. Yeah. Like, I I eat quite a lot of fermented foods. I don't have any, like, histamine issues. Again, fortunately, like, I don't have any, like, almost any sensitivities to any food. Yeah. But, but, yeah, like, you know, my wife, for example, she can't eat, like, a lot of fermented foods, and and she has, like, a lot of other, like, sensitivities to, like, gluten and vaccines and those kind of things. So, yeah, it's very interesting that Has she has she ever had genetic testing done before? Yes. Yeah. I mean, she has, she might have it from, like, some mold illness, as well. Gotcha. Yeah. There's that aspect too. Yeah. So something like this, chronic inflammation triggering the autoimmune response, that can be, one explanation as well. But, yeah, if she probably has, like, some genetic It could be both too. You know? And, like, whenever whenever I travel, I always have DAO enzymes. That's basically a digestive enzyme for histamine that you eat, and I always bring molybdenum, molybdenum with me. That's essentially a digestive enzyme for sulfur that you have because I'm sensitive to both. Right? So it's like I'll be at an event or something. If they're serving something, you know, with pickles or onions or garlic, if I don't have that, I'll just get the brain fog, or I'll kinda feel a little socially awkward. And, normally, I feel fine. Right? And, again, it's it's not an outright rule for everyone. Right? It's listening to these patterns, but a lot of people spend most of their lives with brain fog. So for me to say, oh, just listen to your body, It's like I'm listening. If I always feel like crap, if I always feel like I'm triggered, how do I know what the trigger is? Right? That's a big disconnect there. That's why I try to tell people I just I just released the histamine course. I'm gonna be doing a glutamate course to try to give people actionable tips and make worksheets for people. Imagine if you could write out everything you put in your body that day, and you could highlight and say, wow. There's a lot of glutamate in the morning. I get headaches in the morning. Wow. I have a lot of histamine at night. I don't sleep very well. I truly believe I've seen this with people I work with, especially for more sensitive people, whether it's autism spectrum disorder, OCD, ADHD, those highly sensitive people. These little food related things can actually make a really big difference for people. And not that it's a magic pill cure for everybody. Right? But just connecting the molecules in the food and the supplements. Right? Oh, I'm taking glutathione. I'm taking alpha lipoic acid, and I'm having eggs for breakfast. I would have a migraine all morning from so much sulfur. Right? But not bad for everybody. Just depends on the person. But I'm really on a mission to try to help people learn to understand their bodies better. Right? Because then everyone's on their phone buying everyone's this, this, this, or that that's being marketed to everybody. Right? But you don't really know what's right or wrong for you. Yeah. Speaking of these food sensitivities, then, you know, nowadays, you hear a lot of people talk about different kinds of plant, defense chemicals and oxalates and and that all plants are, harmful for your digestion and health. So and there is obviously a lot of, people sharing their experience with having negative symptoms with, like, either a plant based diet or specific food groups. So, yeah, there's obviously, like, some genetic, effect on individual aspect there. Yeah. Absolutely. I think the the oxalate sensitivity report that I run for clients, I believe that does just over 817,000 snips for oxalate sensitivity. Now, again, I think anyone that's barking that, like, this is good or bad for every human, they clearly don't know what they're talking about, because we are all very different. That being said, you do have things like genetics, but also mold, gut health. Some people really don't do well with oxalates. And I'll ask people with these with that report comes up, you know, do you have any history of kidney stones in the family? And probably eighty percent of the time, these people say yes. I'm like, well, based on a lot of genetic data, you're sensitive to these things. But I my personal belief and what works for me, and I I think that a balanced diet, you know, lean animal proteins, fruits, vegetables, you know, low GI carbs. I think that works the majority of the time for majority of people, and I do think these more extreme type diets, whether it's deep keto or carnivore or pro metabolic, I think these should be more short midterm tools to kind of reset. Even even going vegan or or or vegetarian. Right? I see the benefit in removing meat for a period of time to try to work through some things, but I think the longer you do these more extreme diets, I do think down the road, you'll run into some sort of complications and issue. I think trying to resemble your diet towards your lineage is really important. Right? Because when we say eat ancestrally, that means different for different people. You know? If you're you're from if you're from Russia, you're gonna be eating a lot of, like, animal fat. Right? Animal meat. Right? Not a lot of, like, foliage there to eat versus someone in The Caribbean. Right? It really depends on the person. Yeah. I mean, I guess the worst thing is to, like, marry to a particular diet and, you know, make everything about that and kind of get stuck in a way of eating that even if you're Well, like, it's a religion. Right? And sadly worse. Too many people do that. Right? They get so they get so personally attached to that identity of, you know, hey. This this helped me. Now I have to do it forever. I mean, even Paul Saladino, you know, carnivore MD, he was deep carnivore, and then he switched and started adding in fruits. Right? And I'm like, is that because he got into, you know, health issues? I have no idea. Right? But I think what heals you, the same exact thing that healed you is rarely what keeps you healthy. Right? Like, you go on all these methylated b vitamins when you're doing really sick and you need that support. But then when you're doing better, you don't need all those methyl vitamins all the time. Right? And that's why it's it's hard because you work with someone to figure out what you need for your body, but then the body does change over time. Right? So how do you kinda know when to move in or pull back on these things? It could get complicated. Yeah. You mentioned the methyl methyl donors, and, this is one example that I have maybe that was influenced by genetics. So, yeah, it was my homocysteine was something like 11 last last July, and, it should be ideally, when I have it at, like, slightly lower below 10 or closer to five, I, you know, add a TMG. It took, like, four grams of TMG, which is kind of the upper dose that you would want to take. Also took, like, you know, B complex, etcetera. My almost histidine dropped to, like, nine, and, it didn't get lower even if I increased my TMG from two grams to, four grams. One thing I did change was I started doing this, HBOT hyperbaric oxygen therapy. Did it for two months, and that might drop my hit, homocysteine to, like, 5.5. Oh, wow. So that was the, you know, that was the only thing I changed. That was actually the result of this dramatic, decrease. Whereas the methyl donors and the TMG, which, you know, are known to decrease almost 16, you know, they did it only to a certain extent. They, didn't have any additional benefits. But I've seen online as well people who, I guess, have a similar situation, but they respond very well to b twelve or TMG, whatever it is, that with with those additional supplements, they just decrease their homocysteine to five from 12 or something like that. So there's, yeah, maybe, like, your body responds differently to these different, methyl donors in my example. Yeah. And, you know, there's a maybe your body just doesn't really require that betaine. Right? Because it's like I think that goes through the BHMT gene is what uses betaine. So maybe yours wasn't as mutated. Right? And, you know, other donors, you know, phosphatidylcholine is another good one as well. Creatine. Right? And, yeah, you know, for some people, there's all these different genes. So there's all these genes that methylate to make all these nutrients. Right? So the genes can kind of figure out, do you need more methyl donors from phosphatidylcholine? Do you need more from creatine? Right? But that's really interesting with the hyperbaric oxygen. Is that, like, a commonly known benefit? Like, is it been published? I'm not familiar with with it that much. Is it commonly known to lower that homocysteine, or was, like, an added benefit you didn't expect? Well, it doesn't have actual, like, research that it lowers homocysteine. The reason I, you know, started doing it was because my wife was doing HBOT herself before for her mold illness recovery, and, she saw her homocysteine also go from something like 10 something to five. And, then was like, hey. You know, I'll try it myself, and, yeah, it worked for me too. So I did Super cool. And you said you said it for you did it for a few months? I did it for something like 15 sessions is when I tested it, but I did a total of 20 sessions. Yeah. Something like twice a week on average. Yeah. That stuff I've been wanting to get more you know, I've been really focused on, you know, the vitamins, nutrients type of stuff, but I've been reading more into I guess we'll call it I guess we'll just call it the more, like, the experiential biohacks, if that makes sense, right, that aren't, you know, something you take, like, pharmacologically there. Right. What are what are some things that you see on the horizon, like, really interesting type of modalities that have caught your eye lately? Well, there's a lot of, talk about these microplastics. Right? So I was researching, okay, other ways to actually eliminate them. You know, blood donation is one thing that was seen to reduce these forever chemicals in people, but there's also this thing called, like, plasma donish plasma exchange, and, EBOW, which is this extracorporeal blood ozone oxygenation therapy where they take out your blood, they filter it, they ozonate it, and they actually shine UV light as well into it, and then you get the purified blood back into your system. So, theoretically, that could also filter out some of those microplastic particles and, you know, it's used for so certain autoimmune conditions, like, actually med medically used for those conditions and certain, like, inflammatory conditions, as well. So it could be also be, like, an actual antiaging hack where you're, like, filtering your blood and removing certain, like, you know, old proteins and bacteria and viruses and those kind of things. Plus, it might have, like, some microplastic effects as well. Now I'm curious. When this gets posted, is it gonna be video along with this or just the audio? Video too. Yeah. Okay. No. I was just saying I really, really appreciate you put the antiaging in a little bit of air quotes. Right? Because even I love that even you, a longevity specialist. Right? I love that you can acknowledge that, like, it it's still speculative for I think without a doubt, these modalities extend health span. Mhmm. Right? Like like but the I just love there's just so much people just sensationalizing the hell out of everything. Right? Saying that NAD pill will add ten years on your life. I'm just really glad to see you put it in not that we don't believe in it. Right? But we do need to follow the signs first, so I, really do, appreciate that. But, the, yeah, the microplastic that that did you see that recent study that came out with the dementia? That in the brain? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It was really wild. And, you know, I was I saw that, and I was, you know, one thing I utilize for people if we think there's a microplastic issue, you know, the only sulforaphane has some data, but chlorella actually has there's studies that it's used to remove plastics from aquatic environments. So there's no data that it actually helps a human being lower it. But, again, it's I'm I'm not evidence based. I like to say I'm evidence guided, science based. Right? So, I mean, chlorella, I mean, how many benefits are there anyways? Right? Reading between the lines, I'm like, okay. Well, you know, we don't have a lot of peer reviewed options here for actual detox and, you know, EBOO. You know, those that that's not that's not cheap. Right? So something people could try as well, that chlorella as well. Have you done the EBOO? No. Is that how you say it? EBO, I think it's EBO? Yeah. Yeah. It's something like $2,000 or something in The States. Jeez. But, yeah, I mean, there's a lot of things if you search for it, you do find some molecules and ingredients that have, like, some preclinical data and some, experimental studies that they might help with breaking down BPA or certain, like, microplastics. Certain mushrooms, they use mushrooms in the, like, environmental pollution to degrade environmental plastics. Yeah. I saw that. Right? As well. Yeah. Was that was that engineered, or it's naturally occurring, that mushroom? Not sure. I haven't, specifically looked at it. But, yeah, you know, even melatonin. So melatonin is, like, you know, powerful antioxidant. Mhmm. It also apparently has, like, potential to, like, degrade BPA. So, you know, makes sense. Your body is, you know, detoxing every night, and the glymphatic system specifically works like this plump pump that eliminates toxins from the brain, including different proteins and, potentially, you know, nanoparticles as well. And now what do you what do you like to say to people that say no one should ever take melatonin because it's a hormone? Well, it's a hormone, but, it doesn't work like testosterone. Like, your body makes melatonin in response to the absence of light primarily. So, it doesn't work like testosterone that there's always some testosterone in your in your blood. Right? Then there's some diurnal variation, like it's higher in the morning and lower in the evening, but there's always testosterone in your blood. You know? If you're exposed to these kind of bright lights and, like, sunlight, then your your melatonin production is, you know, mediated by gut hormones and, light cues. It's not it's not like that there is a specific diurnal rhythm that is independent of those things. It's, more about the cues that these are that regulate this okay rhythm and then produces the melatonin in response to those cues. So, yeah. You know? And I think it's I think it's one of the most wrongly demonized supplements if you ask me. I I think it's just really I think it's wild. I think that and vitamin d, I think those are the top two most wrongly demonized supplements. Does everyone need high doses? No. Of course not. But I think it's really interesting that the same practitioners that say don't take vitamin d or don't take melatonin, their hormones, they'll also prescribe testosterone, estrogen, and progesterone. Right? So you see it's kinda like hypocritical. Like, you should kinda pickle one lane or another lane. Right? And it's like, yeah. I think they are really different, and it depends. Right? Like, there's mutations in that clock gene that that's how our cells tell what time of day it is. So if your cells can't tell what time of day it is, you won't release as much melatonin at night if you have that mutation. Maybe you can't synthesize melatonin. I have mutations in my melatonin receptors, the one a and one b receptors. So I I've been taking melatonin. I it's interesting. The same gene that metabolizes caffeine also metabolizes melatonin. Mhmm. So I need more melatonin, but I break it down slowly. So I do maybe no more than a milligram, usually around half a milligram each night. That's all I need personally. But, the, lost my train of thought. With the, oh, the melatonin, you know, the clock genes studies on that say if you're very sensitive to light when you sleep. Like, if you're trying to sleep and if there's that tiny little blue light, you gotta cover it up across the room or anything, that's a good indicator you have these melatonin receptor mutations because these receptors, they're in our eyes, right, for melatonin as well there. I love finding those little patterns. Right? So even if you don't wanna get a genetic test done, you can kinda read between the lines and try to figure that out about your health. Mhmm. Yeah. I I like melatonin as well, and, you know, there's no study that actually shows that it inhibits natural melatonin production even at, like, very large doses. Yep. So, yeah, it's more about the, like, the the light cues and the other signals from the gut and those things. In interesting, actually, like, your gut makes a lot more melatonin than your pineal gland. I think it was something like four hundred four hundred times more, from the gut than, than from the pineal gland. Yeah. I know your mitochondria are you have daytime melatonin too, like, within the mitochondria as well. I think that's a higher proportion versus the pineal amount too. So, yeah, I mean, I like to classify it as a detox antioxidant more than a sleep aid. Right? Have you ever tried the mega high doses of it? I've tried, like, ten milligrams. I haven't done the hundred milligrams. Okay. But, yeah, ten milligrams for a week and occasionally on and off, I take that. And now you took that before bed? Yeah. Yeah. Because I know I I worked with some people. For, like, long COVID, I would utilize that fifty, hundred, even up to two hundred milligrams. That's interesting for a lot of these people. Get that? There's there's one on Amazon. I forgot the brand. It's a it's a brand sold directly from the vendor, but they sell hundred milligram, pills of that. Wow. Now, interestingly, a lot of those people would actually get more energized. So you take it in the morning. So it's kinda, again, one of those biphasic responses, to that. Again, the genes are just so funny. My wife, she's a she's a ultra fast metabolizer, the sip one a two, kinda like you. And, she can take triple, quadruple the melatonin dose I do. She'll still bounce out of bed, and I could still sometimes be a little groggy if I go over a milligram. So it's just so I don't know. It's just so fascinating. You know? People still try to act like genetics aren't a thing, but it's like they are a thing. We just need to find better ways to map things out properly and present them. I think the majority of these testings out there, it's they could throw whatever marketing they want on the front end. None of this stuff is really clinically verified on the back end. Right? So it's like, you could have the same DNA, three different companies, and they're saying different things. Like, how do you know what to listen to? Just goes to show how important the interpretation is versus just that testing. Yeah. When I take melatonin, the ten milligrams, I did feel, like, kinda groggy and tired in the morning. Yeah. So what if I take zero point three milligrams, then I feel, very good. Yep. Yeah. Where's that threshold? Right? Like, where where do you gotta hit before it starts waking you up? You know? Yeah. You mentioned the vitamin d, and I recall you you saying another interview was that you had some, problems getting vitamin d from the sun. So can you talk about that? Yeah. Absolutely. So the d h c r seven gene, that's the gene that takes that UVB radiation and converts cholesterol into pre vitamin d. Mutations in that gene, as you'd expect in the literature, it's linked to lower vitamin d, circulating vitamin d levels. It's also linked to vitamin d related illnesses. So whether it's type one diabetes or multiple sclerosis or mood related issues. So I love the beach, and I was you know, this was many this is, I don't know, how many years ago, probably eight, nine years ago. Lot of inflammatory issues, anxiety issues. I was going to the beach all the time. My levels were pretty low, and the doctor, you know, wanted me to supplement. So I went on a vitamin d supplement, and I was taking, I think, ten thousand IUs. And my levels went up by, I think I think, ten or eleven nanograms per milliliter, which is not really much at all. And I'm like, why didn't my levels go up on ten thousand IU? Like, they're like, I don't know. Go up to thirty thousand IU a day. That'll get you where you need to be. And this is kind of the same time I was getting into the genetics. So I looked at the vitamin d pathway. That d h c r seven gene is what makes it from sunlight, but then you have to hydroxylate it. That's done by the CYP two r one gene. Turns out I have five mutations in that gene. So the vitamin d I'm taking, that cholciferol, ninety nine point nine percent of people that take vitamin d are taking, you need to convert it. So if you're listening and your vitamin d levels don't go up on blood work with supplementation, they try to give you an injection that still doesn't go up. It's not an absorption issue. It's a conversion issue. So then I went and I found an over the counter brand of the preactivated vitamin d. I took it. Within two days, I felt so much better. And within three weeks, my levels were actually too high. I had to back off on the dosing because, again, it it was a bio it was a conversion issue genetically. So that's a, calcifediol supplementation for that. And Vitamore d is the brand that, I love for that. They ship globally, and it's basically it's the exact form your body needs to circulate and do all these good things. You gotta be careful. It can go up very, very high. I recommend starting out with one tablet, but for people with a lot of mutations in that conversion, that is probably one of the most life changing adjustments I make for people. We know how important vitamin d is. But imagine if whether you get it through food, through a supplement, or through sunlight, there's still a massive roadblock. So how do you address that? The people that say no one should take vitamin d, we make it from sunlight. Not everyone makes it from sunlight the same. So all these people that are outright against vitamin d, some of these I'm not gonna name names, but people will tag me in stuff that says never take vitamin d, because people know I'm a big vitamin d guy. And I politely try to mention the genetic aspect. They'll ignore me. They'll block me. They'll delete my comment. Right? And it's like, I love being proved wrong. Right? Because you're getting closer to the truth. Right? We should be excited to have these types of conversations. But, hey. Some people like to, you know, make their whole identity about one, you know, dogmatic thing and run with it. It is what it is. But, as time goes on, you know, I hope throughout my career, I could really show to people that vitamin d is really undervalued for a lot of people. And, yeah, I mean, I like people to be around that fifty to seventy nanogram per milliliter range for most people, but then there's also the vitamin d receptors. So receptor mutations are really interesting to me because they fundamentally change how you read blood work. Some people need to go up to a hundred nanograms per milliliter. That receptor is barely working. You can't detect the vitamin d. I mean, that's you guys use animals. Right? Yeah. But I Yeah. So they look for the probably around, like, two around, like, two two fifty or so, nanogram, nanomole per liter. That's really, really high by normal standards. But if your cells can't detect it properly, now you finally feel it how you should. So kind of a rant or we could do a whole talk just about vitamin d, but it's not always just take more magnesium and boron, and you'll be fine. A lot of people still have hardwired genetic issues that are doing all the right things, and it's still not going up. And that form of vitamin d, that vitamin d can really be a game changer. Yeah. And, usually, those people then they don't they don't live in Northern Europe. Yes. Well, that that as well. Yeah. Exactly. I know. They they have the they have, like, the spermy lamps and all these vitamin d lamps, and that's great. But if you can't convert sunlight to vitamin d very well, you know, that might help, but you're not gonna be getting the full benefit there. Right? So there's all these other weird rabbit holes, this or that, that really just does depend on the person. Mhmm. Yeah. One supplement I do wanna talk about as well is omega threes. So, you know, very kind of evidence based supplement or there's a lot of, like, evidence about the benefits of omega threes and having the higher omega three index. But there's also, like, some of, these, I guess, one counterargument always is that it increases your risk of atrial fibrillation and, palpitations so that you shouldn't take omega threes. So, is there any, like, genetic risk for the atrial fibrillation? Yeah. No. Definitely. And, you know, this is I don't have a peer reviewed study to point to. Right? But based on the work that I do, right, when when you think about it, fish are very high in amines, biogenic amines. So histamine is an amine. Mhmm. So, these amines in fish, if you have if you're sensitive to histamine, they can trigger mass cell degranulation to dump histamine. And what do histamine issues mass cell issues cause? Afib, heart palpitations, headaches. So for certain people that are more histamine sensitive, and a lot of my clients are really sensitive to histamine, I like to opt for a good algae vegan sourced one. So it has the same omega three structure. Right? Same molecule just lacking all the amines from the fish. Some people do great on it. Right? But some people, you know, they'll have a headache. We remove the cod liver oil. Their headache goes away. Right? We know headaches are from high histamines. Right? So, I think having a healthy omega three index is really, really important. But if you are histamine sensitive, you may wanna make sure, you know, you have proper support for histamine clearance. You're not eating too much fermented foods. Right? So you kinda see it's like, if you lower the histamine you consume through diet, you should be able to tolerate fish oil better. Right? Because it's all about the histamine signaling. Think about a bucket. Right? If it gets overfilled, then you run into issues. So it's like, how do you wanna lower your histamine? Do you wanna clean up your gut? Do you wanna eat less? Do you wanna use DAO enzymes? Do you wanna again, the mold, right, infections also raise histamine. Right? So a lot of different ways you could try to lower it, but usually for a lot of people I work with, I really like the Nordic naturals and even metagenics. They have some good algae based omega three. That's what I personally take each day. I take around two grams EPA DHA from the algae based omegas because, personally, anything over a gram and a half, two grams of fish based omega threes, I start to notice, a little more revved up. I don't get heart palpitations, but I feel it really a little minorly, but it's noticeable. So I just opt for the algae based. Yeah. I mean, you're you know, I guess, yeah, the fish oil and omega threes, they're kind of different than capsules, this powder capsules because, yeah, you have the actual oil that, tends to can ferment or, you know, accumulate the histamine. So, yeah, it makes sense that it Well, and it's too. It's not it's not even so much that it's accumulating histamine either. This is this is independent of, you know, oxidation or any of these other things. Fish something called, scromboid fish poisoning. Do you ever heard of that before? No. So scromboid fish poisoning is when certain types of fish, I think, like, marlin, the exact fish names. That doesn't matter. Either way, certain big fish that people eat, if they're not stored properly, certain bacteria can convert those amines into histamine. And people will eat that, and they'll get covered head to toe bright red like eczema, rashes, crazy heart palpitations, and they go to they go to the ER. They just give them a Benadryl to block the histamine. Right? So I guess my point I was trying to make there was fish itself has a lot of amines. Even regardless of the quality or the source, doesn't you can have the purest fish oil in the world. It's still gonna have a lot of amines. Right? So it's not even so much a quality or branding issue like cod liver. I think Rosita is, like, one of the most common cod liver oil brands, and they have very clean products. But that doesn't change the fact there's a lot of amines. And if you're sensitive to amines, whether it's tyramine or histamine, they could be potentially problematic. Yeah. Makes sense. Where do people start with, like, understanding this if they wanna understand their genetics more or kind of which foods, which supplements, affect their like, how do yeah. Like, how their genetics affects their food and supplements? Yeah. I mean, good starting point. Follow me. Right? That's what I try to, make a content about. I just released some, free courses about genetics one zero one, you know, just the basics of understanding these things. Right? I cover a lot of, I think, issues with the genetic space right now. A lot of people want answers. You know? No matter what you think about him, Gary Breca, like, really brought a lot of limelight to genetics. And a lot of people are curious, but it's more than just MTHFR. Right? And so I have a free course about that. I have a free course. You know, if you listening here enjoyed talking about the cell signaling pathway. Right? Histamine, it's not just food or supplements or toxicity or it's all of it together. Right? Or the glutamate thing. You know? Thinking in terms of pathways really simplifies things. So I told you I released a histamine course, but I have a free primer course leading up to that about understanding from cell signaling pathways wise. And, yeah, I'm working on a lot of really, really cool things to try and educate about this stuff. I also do genetic work one on one. So that's the main thing I do with people. If if you're someone that's curious and wants to get answers and you tried a lot of things that don't work, I'm really confident here saying that the way I look at the genes is different than most people do because I think a big missing piece of genetics, the space, a lot of people know what the mutations mean. How do you know the pharmacology of what nutrients to use to help those genes? Right? So I could see a report. People are put on supplements, but the supplements they use right? You're helping one thing but hurting other things. So, yeah, a lot of different ways to learn, but, yeah, that's what I really wanna make content about. Right? These nuance type things, and it's it's funny. And some of the comments on my posts, half of it will be people like, oh, you know, you're just fear mongering. This is a bunch of BS. You know? Look at this charlatan, whatever mumbo jumbo. The other half of people are like, oh my god. I can't tolerate that either. Right? Kinda you mentioned the glycine. Right? Like, oh my god. I can't So clearly, it matters, just not for everybody, and I really wanna educate people which type of health advice you should and shouldn't be listening to based on you the individual. Mhmm. Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. Well, it's been great, talking with you, and, definitely, people should check out those courses and information. Before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and your work? Yeah. So I'm at doctor Tyler Pans there. Instagram, Facebook, TikTok, LinkedIn, www.doctortylerpansett.com. I have a free email newsletter as well you could sign up for there. And one thing as well, I I wanna I wanna offer a discount if people wanna do one on one work with me, you know, from your audience. What would you want, the discount code to be? It can be seam. Cool. Let's do that. Yeah. So I'll set it up. So seam, well, that'll cover the DNA kits I use, cost a $150. So that usually what I do. Happy to do that. So you'll get your DNA kit for free. If you already have data, then you'll just get a $150 off one of the package offerings I have. I have a few of them. So, yeah, I'll get that set up. And, yeah, really, thank you so much for having me on. This was, great to nerd out a little bit, deeper on things. Right? We're all we're both nerds at heart, right, to dive deep into that. And, yeah, hope you guys listened and got some value. Thanks again. Yeah. It was great. We'll put the links in the show notes. And, my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you adopted sooner? Allergy testing. Food allergy testing. I, turns out a lot of my histamine brain fog issues because I was eating peas and almonds every day for lunch. I was allergic, and I was working with mice pretty much every day, and I'm allergic to mice. Oh, wow. I had to go to five allergists. The first four would not test me. I didn't sneeze. I didn't have a runny nose. I didn't have the regular classical allergic symptoms, so they told me I didn't have allergies. I'm like, listen. Headaches, brain fogging, these are signs of allergies, high histamine. Thank God the fifth one tested me, and I was kinda like, screw all you other guys. Right? Because I did have those allergy issues there. It's not just the major symptoms people think of. So, yeah, that was one thing I wish I did a lot sooner. If I got hives from the mice, I woulda got it checked years before. Right? So that was a big moment for me. So so that is not like a food sensitivity test. It's some other allergy test. Yeah. So the sensitivity test check for IgG antibodies, which are different than I so IgG as in George, IgE as in Eric, that is true allergic reaction. So the food sensitivities can be more transient centralized around the gut. The IgE and allergies are body wide immune system thing. So I got a skin prick test, or you could do an IgE as an ERIC blood test versus the sensitivity. It's a good one and done touches to kinda rule things out. Because, again, it's not just I'm fine or my throat's gonna swell shut. It could be impacting your life. Maybe not life threateningly, but life impactingly. Mhmm. Yeah. Something, minor minor things. Yep. And the minor things can add up. Yeah. Mhmm. Well, yeah, it was a great talking with you, and, you know, we'll definitely have to do another follow-up in the future about the other supplements that we didn't cover. Yeah. We got a lot of them, so, happy to do that. Thank you. Yeah. Well, I'll see you around. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.