My wife, Inka, is a clinical nutritionist and neuropsychologist. We're both into health and longevity. We both exercise. We track blood work, and we take some supplements. However, we do have different goals and different preferences on our daily supplement protocols. Yeah. So in this video, we're gonna go through our common supplements, what supplements we have different, and why we take certain supplements. So let's start with, like, the daily supplements. What kind of supplements do we both take daily? So for me, at least, my daily protocol has included quite a few years, omega three fatty acids. Yeah. Both of us. Yeah. Yeah. And that is primarily because of I've noticed it's impacting my, like, brain function very positively, focus and memory. And, glycine? Yes. Surprise. Yeah. We both take glycine for mostly, like, the collagen benefits and the glutathione benefits, and we take it for sleep as well. Yeah. It it has like really upgraded the skin, I would say. Yeah. Very effective. Like more effectively than pure collagen alone, which although we both take that one as well. Yeah. Well, the thing I think with that is the collagen alone. Yeah. You're getting some glycine from there and collagen does support skin health, which we both take as well. But, I think, you need like larger doses of glycine optimally for the collagen synthesis. So you that's why we we we we both added extra glycine, it works a lot better than just taking collagen alone. And another skin, I guess, supplement would be asteaxanthin that, has skin benefits. It also is useful for protecting against sun, sunburn and UV radiation. What else do we take commonly? Botovascular and it takes taurine every day. I've been taking taurine, for a little bit to see if it impacts my, like, VO2 max and exercise performance. So there's research that taurine helps with, like, metabolic health, which, you know, I don't have a problem with. But there's also a research that it helps with, exercise and VO two max. I've been trying to take, like, six grams every day, which is quite large, to see if if it's gonna have any positives on that. But are you taking taurine? Yeah. Every day. And, I think at first I thought it I couldn't see much difference, but something in my supplement stack at the moment is making a great impact on my mental, like, performance and energy levels. So I think taurine might be one of the key players there. One supplement we both take is also trimethylglycine TMG. So, you know, that's for me at least, is mostly for the methylation benefits. There's some research that could also help with exercise, but, methylation and helping the homocysteine is what we, I think, mostly take it for. I've noticed impact on my homocysteine levels for sure. And because I tend to eat quite high protein and high animal protein as well, TMG is kind of like a non negotiable for me at the moment to counteract that. Yeah. So, I think that's pretty much what we share with supplements like, collagen, glycine, astaxanthin, omega threes, TMG, and, taurine right now, what supplements do we differ? Well, one, one supplement that I also take daily pretty much is hyaluronic acid, for the skin. Do you take it daily? I take it maybe a few times a week. Okay. Yeah. But you're using, like, some hyaluronic acid serum. Right? Yeah. So for the face, I definitely use serum every day Mhmm. And the supplement every now and then. Melatonin. So, at least I don't take it daily. I take it maybe once or twice a week, and, I don't even need it for, like, the sleep. I take it mostly for, like, the antioxidant benefits. I'll take, like, zero point three, maybe up to three milligrams, of melatonin. What about you? So I take melatonin every single day. And I guess a good background for your viewers who know nothing about me is that I have a migraine that's in remission. I optimize quite a lot for brain health and neuroprotection, and melatonin is one of the best ones that I've noticed. I though I vary that dose between zero point three, that's probably the most common that I take, but up to two grams every day. Mhmm. And sometimes I do take breaks for a month or weeks. But Yeah. Like, you know, the reason I don't take it daily isn't because I fear that it's gonna stop my natural production. That's not, like, true. It doesn't stop your natural production. I don't take it daily because I just kind of forget it or or something like that. And you know, there is actually some research that the melatonin after resistance to renaming is an antioxidant. So it like also blunts the muscle hypertrophy response. Similar with vitamin c or other antioxidants. So, you know, I don't wanna take it every day after I lift weights or something because it can undermine some of the muscle hypertrophy signal. Yeah. For for me, I don't take it daily, every day because I notice if I keep especially if I take high doses every day, I get a little bit depressed. Then I need to lower the dose Okay. To be able to kind of get get my mood back. Another one we take on and off for specific reasons is like, berberine. And berberine is great for, you know, blood sugar regulation. It's also great for visceral fat loss and cholesterol and lipid metabolism. So we take it usually berberine if we're gonna, I guess, go out to restaurant or have some higher carb meal. But again, we don't want to take it or at least I don't want to take it chronically so that it would jeopardize like some muscle hypertrophy signal. But, yeah, like it's kinda good to have it, yeah, if you have, like, a very fatty meal or, like, a high carb meal or if you're just going to a restaurant or something like that. I don't have that much problems of taking it daily. Mhmm. I don't have that much muscle anyways. Next supplement, we have a creatine. So creatine is obviously very good for muscle growth and brain function and, you know, just general health. But, I don't take it daily because of, VO2max. So creatine can decrease VO2max. So I take it only if I'm trying to focus on more lifting weights and if I'm focusing more on cardio or VO2 max, then I'm not taking the creatine. Right? Should we give you some creatine? He eats creatine every day. But what about you? From meat? Yeah. Natural sources. I don't take creatine daily either. I just take it after sleep loss. It's one of the most amazing supplements. I think very potent after sleep loss for restoring that mental energy. Creatine, many people think of it as exercise supplement, but it is one of the most significant supplements also for brain health and mental performance. So if you are, what was the study about the sleep loss on creatine? So the recent study that up to like twenty eight grams of creatine after sleep deprivation restored some cognitive performance. So, yeah, if you're sleep deprived or traveling or jet lagged, then you can take creatine, larger doses even, like ten, twenty grams, and it helps to, I guess, restore some of the performance. So one of the supplements that I also use specifically for cognitive benefits and if I am under more of a mental load, I used it a lot when I was studying at the university, is lion's mane. And it contains heritinones and erinacins, which are the compounds that are responsible for the increase in nerve growth factors, potentially neuroplastic benefits in the brain. So Mhmm. I like it. I like also the taste just to put it in a coffee, put it in the hot chocolate drink. That's probably my favorite way of using it. Mhmm. It just gives this nice mental sharpness. Yeah. But you don't use Lion's Mane that much. Right? Yeah. No. Like, I've tried it in the past, but I don't know. I've never never stuck with it. NACs, like, another supplement we take usually if, we feel like we're catching a cold or something, because, yeah, it's a good antioxidant for gluethan. And, the similar with, other antioxidants. I don't wanna take it, like, after exercise that much. But but, generally, we're feeling a bit under the weather or something like that. If it's the flu season, then, NAC is very, very useful for that. So, yeah, not another daily thing. Also intravenously. Very good. IV, NACM. What about magnesium? I take magnesium every single day, and I've done it for probably almost ten years now. It's my number one top favorite supplement because of its potent effect in the brain, especially magnesium L three and eight. I have noticed that the the type of magnesium make a huge difference on how I feel with the magnesium and also the doses that I need. Currently, I have I stick with magnesium L threonate because it does give me this kind of like a smooth focus and flow. It does support sleep, and it is the only form that effectively crosses blood brain barrier. And because for me currently, I'm like optimizing for my brain health due to mold previous mold illness and stuff. So that's why I use the l three zero eight and it works. Yeah. I'm not taking magnesium daily because I I don't know. I don't feel like I need to. I eat, like, a lot of magnesium foods, And, I might take it if I'm feeling stressed or if I wanna get a very good sleep, but that's only, like, very infrequently. What else are you taking for your, like, mold illness recovery? So after, like, mold illness recovery, you want to support your gut and your brain. So for liver detox, I'm taking Tutka. It's, yeah. It's a little like a biolase that helps to detox the liver. It also has neuroprotective effects, so it's also good for the brain. It does cross the blood brain barrier and, reduce oxidative stress and also improve mitochondrial function in the brain. I also use sodium butyrate for a sore chain fatty acid production. Mhmm. And, the gut health. So many people actually don't know about sodium butyrate. When we discuss about gut health, many people think, like, probiotics and maybe l glutamine. But sodium butyrate is also the key supplements that I would recommend for gut health in combination with L theanine and L glutamine. I've noticed it's very effective. Yeah. And some supplements that are what I take specifically that you're not taking are a boron, which, I usually take it, not daily, but, let's say on periods. I wanna kind of focus a bit more on, like, hormones and, because it helps with lowering SHBG. Like, I find if I eat a lot of carbohydrates, then, the SHBG is already naturally lower, which is supported by research as well. Like low carb diets raise SHBG and tend to lower testosterone. So if I'm eating less carbs, I take boron to lower the SHBG and help with, free testosterone levels. But if I'm eating a lot of carbs and I'm not in a calorie deficit, then, I don't need it because the carbohydrate is already lowered SHBG. Another one is a rhodiola rosea. I've been testing it only for like, VLT maxima with taurine. And, it's like an adaptogen. Helps with, yeah, like, stress as well as exercise, performance and endurance. But, yeah, I think that's it. We also made a video where we compared our experience with taking NEC every day. So you can check out that video next in the description.