I took different types of methylene blue for a month to see whether or not it makes me feel worse or better. Some say methylene blue is a miracle drug that saved their life, whereas others claim it's toxic and it's going to reduce your energy production. A healthy human is not benefiting from methylene blue. Get rid of it. It's it's bullshit. If you have a broken mitochondrial electron transport chain, maybe you benefit in the short term. I'll be sharing my own experience and the dosage I used in a bit. I'll also have doctor Scott Scherer comment on Paul Saladino's video about methylene blue. I'm a clinician. My team, there's four doctors on the team including me. We're the only team out there, the only company out there that's been using it in clinical practice. Ninety four percent of The US population has mitochondrial dysfunction, number one. So in that population of ninety four percent of people, you have a significant proportion of those that can benefit from methylene blue some of the time. First, let's talk about the main effects of methylene blue, which is the support of energy production during mitochondrial dysfunction. A lot of people report that methylene blue increases their energy and helps to overcome brain fog, fatigue, or cognitive deficits. Methylene blue acts as an alternative electron carrier that bypasses complex one and three activity in the mitochondrial electron transport chain. Methylene blue also stimulates complex four activity, which increases oxygen consumption and energy output through cytochrome c oxidase. This means that methylene blue can support energy production during mitochondrial dysfunction or damaged complex one and three in the electron transport chain. However, if you don't have mitochondrial dysfunction or impaired electron transport chain, methylene blue might reduce energy production. That's because it inhibits complex one and three activity, which is a major contributor to your overall energy. And the other thing to mention about methylene blue that's interesting from a clinical perspective, what you find is it almost works like an adaptogen. It's what if you need more oxidative stress support because you have antioxidant deficiency or you're not doing lots of exercise, you're not recovering well, methylene blue is gonna work there primarily. If it needs to be more related to energy donation, so electron donation to the electron transport chain, it's gonna do that. Alright. Now that this is out of the way, here are the doses I used. For one week, I took the liquid methylene blue tincture at a dose of five milligrams total per day. I mixed it with a glass of water and drank it. For the second week, I took the methylin blue trochees that are like mints that you keep in your cheek or you just swallow. One trochee was sixteen milligrams, so I took one quarter of the entire thing, and it's easily broken into small pieces. When it comes to the optimal dose for most people, I really break it into kinda two buckets. There is the very low dose. This is two, four, six, eight, up to about twenty five milligrams. These are more for mitochondrial optimization, good from mild to moderate mitochondrial dysfunction. So the higher doses, this is around a milligram per kilogram to two milligrams per kilogram. This is more of your anti infective dose and so I use it all the time as an anti infective at these doses, all for gut infections, for viral infections, fungal infections. In my clinical practice, urinary tract infections as well. Now you wouldn't wanna do this without supervision from a clinician, of course, if you had a medical issue, you needed, you know, another medication at the same time or something like that. What about my results? What did I experience? Overall, I didn't notice anything. Maybe it's because my mitochondria are working so well and my metabolism is in peak condition that I don't notice a thing. I didn't notice any improvement, but I also didn't notice any decline in my energy or brain performance. So it's not surprising to me, Sam, you didn't feel a whole lot at four milligrams. It's dose dependent for almost everybody. I have some patients that I work with that will feel a huge shift on just like two milligrams of methylene blue. Their brain turns back on. Their energy is better. But what I would have been interested for you specifically is actually using methylene blue and titrating the dose while you were doing some endurance work overall. My recommendation to you next time, Sim, if you're gonna try this, is to titrate your dose. Start off at the four milligrams like you did. And after three days, if you don't feel much, then increase it to eight milligrams. Then after about three days, if you don't feel much, then increase it to twelve. Second, the taste of methylene blue as a tincture tastes quite bad. It's not horrible, but it's not tasty either. The methylene blue trochees, however, did stain my tongue and mouth with blue color for a lot longer. I wasn't very excited about that either because, yeah, it makes your teeth and your tongue blue. But fortunately, you can also just swallow the trochee immediately or you can immediately brush your teeth after the fact. I obviously couldn't see if my brain or other organs turned blue, but it's very unlikely in such a small dose. Methylene blue at very, very high doses. We're talking about three milligrams per kilogram IV or higher used for septic shock, people that were having cardiac arrest, getting CPR and then as a last ditch effort, they were getting methylene blue in these high amounts and then they had postmortems three to five hours later. This is not surprising that their brains are blue. This is a huge amount of methylene blue. Clinically, we're talking about as we just mentioned earlier in the video like four milligrams, eight milligrams instead of three milligrams per kilogram which is gonna be like two hundred and forty, two hundred milligrams of methylene blue in the IV. So it's it's like exponentially higher as far as the dosing goes. Overall, methylene blue is very interesting. It doesn't have a lot of clinical trials, but the clinical evidence that we have suggests that it might have some benefits in treating certain conditions that are characterized by mitochondrial dysfunction or energy impairment. As a healthy 30 year old who is in excellent health, I can't say I noticed anything, but I also didn't experience any decline in my energy, cognition, or well-being either. The other thing I wanna mention is that there is a hereditary disorder called g six PD deficiency, glucose six phosphate deficiency, and this is when your red blood cells are more sensitive to stress and they can hemolyze. They can break open under stress. And so very high doses of methylene blue have been described as causing a hemolytic crisis or a red blood cell destruction crisis. This is again going to be over one milligram per kilogram. It's only been described in IV. You should definitely get a GCSPD test. It's very easy to get with your any provider really. The other thing about it being a monoamine oxidase inhibitor is that it increases serotonin and dopamine. So if you're on drugs that increase the amount of serotonin and dopamine around, you have to be careful. I might see myself using methylene blue if I am going to experience some aspects of energy deprivation such as during flights. If you are flying, especially long haul flights, then methylene blue might come in handy, but I don't see myself using it on a daily basis. There are at least 15 ingredients that do have a solid amount of evidence from clinical trials for various health benefits. Check out my video about the top 15 supplements next.