Scientists did something that I didn't expect to see for many years. They restored severe memory and cognitive deficits in mice with aggressive Alzheimer's by using a novel experimental compound. Not just slowed it down, not just improved cognition a little bit, they restored their cognition and memory back to normal healthy levels. The research was done on genetically modified mice with a very high Alzheimer's disease burden, specifically the five x FAD mice who have higher beta amyloid plaque accumulation, as well as the PS one nine mice with higher tau protein that drives brain degeneration and cognitive decline. After the experimental treatment, the mice with Alzheimer's saw their worse cognition and memory revert to levels equivalent to healthy mice without Alzheimer's. Now, let's be clear, this is not a cure for Alzheimer's, and it may never work in humans. But it's still a pretty big milestone in my opinion, because all other treatments for Alzheimer's have so far failed. But that's not all. The study also revealed an important link with something that I've been talking about the channel for many years. And it's something that every one of us can do on a daily basis. Alright. Let's start by going through the study. They had these genetically modified mice who had a very high burden of Alzheimer's and cognitive decline compared to regular healthy mice. At two months of age already, the mice were presymptomatic with Alzheimer's, which is the equivalent of teenage or early twenties for humans. At the age of two months, one of the groups of five x FAD mice started a preventive treatment program. The treatment was a daily intraperitoneal injection of p seven c three a twenty for four months. P seven c three a twenty is a neuroprotective small molecule that restores brain NAD levels. NAD is a key cellular cofactor involved in energy metabolism, DNA repair, oxidative stress, and cell survival. The second group of five x FAD mice started treatment at the six month mark and did so for six months. The five x FAD mice who didn't get this treatment had severe memory deficits, movement problems, neuro inflammation, and brain damage by the twelve month mark. That's the equivalent of mid forties for humans, which is extremely early. You can see it on these graphs, but I'm not going to go into the details. I'll put the link to the full study down below. They also had 45% lower brain NAD levels, which is what the treatment p seven c three a twenty was targeting. P seven c three a twenty restored brain NAD levels, which then led to a complete restoration of cognitive and memory deficits in mice who received it. The p s one nine mice started their treatment at 11 of age and did so for only thirty days. Even then, the treatment protocol restored energy status, restored cognition and memory in these mice with advanced Alzheimer's disease. Here's a rundown of the results of this experiment. The wild type normal healthy mice who didn't have increased risk of Alzheimer's saw no change. They were the control group. The five x FAD mice who had high risk of Alzheimer's with no treatment saw severe Alzheimer's disease by twelve months. The symptoms worsened with age, and they had full spectrum of Alzheimer's disease symptoms. The FXFAD mice who received the p seven c three a twenty treatment starting at two months of age until the age of six months blocked the onset of pathology. They started to get symptoms at two months, but the treatment prevented the disease progression. The five x FAD mice who received the treatment starting at six months of age until the age of 12 saw a reversal in their disease status. They fully reversed the decline in cognitive and memory function, as well as motor behavior. The PS one nine mice who received no treatment also saw severe Alzheimer's disease symptoms, and they experienced no recovery. The PS one nine mice who received the treatment starting at the age of 11 until the age of 12 also saw reversal in their cognitive and memory function. Again, it's not a full cure or treatment for Alzheimer's, but I think it's pretty good to be optimistic about these results. Because as I said, so far, no other Alzheimer's treatment has been very successful. And again, this might not pan out to humans, but I'm pretty sure that scientists will keep researching and developing this treatment over the next few years, making it more effective, more preventive, and safer. Now the reason I'm excited about this is also because of the treatment. The treatment that they used, p seven c three a twenty, targets NAD metabolism, and the results came from the increased NAD levels. NAD is a popular longevity molecule, and your body needs NAD to do everything, energy production, hormones, etcetera. The study found that the mice with Alzheimer's and human Alzheimer's patients have about 30 to 40% lower NAD levels in the brain. The way the p7c3a20 therapy increased NAD levels was by enhancing the activity of NAMPT, the rate limiting step in NAD recycling. Now if you've been watching my channel for a few years, then you would know that I've been talking about the importance of NAEPT and the NAD salvage pathway for many years. In my opinion, the NAD salvage pathway is the most underrated and most overlooked aspect when it comes to NAD metabolism and NAD production. No one else really talks about it, but if you know the physiology, then you would know that up to 80 to 90 of your daily NAD pool comes from the NAD recycling pathway, and all the NAD that you consume, whether from supplements, NAD IVs, or from your dietary sources, it goes into the salvage pathway. You see, your body produces NAD via several pathways. You have the price handler pathway that makes NAD through niacin. You have the de novo biosynthesis pathway that makes NAD from tryptophan. But then you have the recycling pathway that recycles all of the NAD you make, thus contributing the most out of all pathways to your daily NAD pool. Even taking NMN or NR results in your NAD being recycled in the NAD salvage pathway. NAMPT is the rate limiting step in the salvage pathway, which means that it determines how much NAD gets recycled. Think of it as a bouncer at the club. It determines how many people get in. The therapy used on the Alzheimer's mice p seven c three a 20 isn't an NAD precursor like NMN or NR. It's an NAMPT activator, which recycles NAD, making it more sustainable. So are there any other ways of increasing NAMPT activity? Yes, there are. You activate NAMPT through AMPK, the fuel sensor that gets activated under physiological stress, such as exercise, calorie restriction, or fasting. AMPK increases energy demand, and NAMPT responds by increasing NAD recycling. However, there's a condition for NAMPT as well. NAMPT is SIRT one dependent. SIRT one is a sirtuin that regulates circadian rhythms and energy homeostasis, which means that the NAPT is dependent on circadian rhythm regulation. This is another critical component that many people overlook or they haven't realized yet. The circadian rhythms are inherently linked to NAD production, and you need circadian rhythm alignment to keep your NAD recycling pathway working optimally. On my channel, I've also talked about how circadian clock dysfunction and circadian rhythm misalignment will eventually be categorized as a new hallmark of aging. Because with age, you see a decline in circadian clock function, resulting in worse circadian rhythm function. And it goes beyond just sleep. Circadian clock dysfunction is now recognized as a risk factor for heart disease by the American Heart Association. If your circadian clocks are out of sync, your bodily functions are chaotic and more energy consuming. If your clocks are in sync, then everything works like clockwork. In practice, it manifests in older individuals having more flatline circadian output, low cortisol in the morning and low melatonin in the evening, whereas younger individuals have a big amplitude in their circadian rhythms. I call this the chronic jet lag syndrome. Due to flatline circadian hormones, your body doesn't know what time of the day it is. So I hope everything starts to make more sense and you see the pattern. The cornerstone to making NAD on autopilot is to have your NAD recycling pathway working optimally. And for that, the prerequisite is circadian rhythm alignment. Of course, you can take all the supplements. You can do the exercise. You can eat dietary phytonutrients and other things that support NAD recycling, but the circadian rhythm alignment is a key factor. I'm not saying that stimulating NAMPT with exercise, calorie restriction, and just looking at the sunrise is going to prevent Alzheimer's or cure it. Obviously, these are completely different things that I'm talking about here. But what I am saying is that based on this new research, NAD appears to have a quite important role in Alzheimer's and neurodegeneration. And more importantly, there are things we can do on a daily basis to keep our NAD levels high and have our NAD being recycled on autopilot, Rather than just focusing on things like NAD injections, NAD IVs, and taking a lot of NAD precursors, it's more important to focus on the NAD recycling. Yes. In some situations, you do need a boost, for lack of a better word, but NAD is also implicated in cancer, which means that the cancers use NAD for their own survival, not necessarily that NAD promotes cancer, but NAD is a energy currency that cancers can also use. So very high levels of NAD obviously aren't gonna be beneficial. So you wanna have your NAD being recycled rather than just have super physiological levels of NAD. Overall, this was a very interesting study that I wanted to share with you, and I think the connection with the NAD recycling is also very relevant. If you wanna learn more about optimizing your circadian rhythms and prevent circadian clock dysfunction, then check out this video next.