How much you eat, what you eat, and when do you eat? Which one is the most important? Which one is the least important? I think a lot of people benefit from higher protein intakes. I think where the protein is coming from is really important. Going to a podcast and getting coffee is bad without any context or whatever. Unless it's my coffee. Yeah. Unless it's my coffee, of course. Okay. Greg, Seem, thanks for being here. So because, there might be a group of people that don't know who you are, be curious if you guys could, give me a bit of background on, I guess, your educational background, just a a few minutes on that and, generally yeah. I guess just generally who you are. Yeah. Greg, you can start. Thanks, C. Hello, everyone. I'm Greg. In terms of educational background, did my undergrad in sport and exercise science at Loughborough University. And around that time, I first started coaching people too. Works primarily with hundred and two hundred meter sprinters. And then also really deepened my interest in science, and I did a project that was sponsored by the physiological society that was looking at relationships between skeletal muscle fiber composition and sprinting and jumping performance. And then continued down that path doing exercise physiology masters at the same university, carried on coaching. But around that time, I realized that I wanted to broaden my understanding of the various factors that affect long term health and performance. And so I was looking at PhD opportunities and found one at University of Leeds, which was basically about the intersection between how we sleep, our biological rhythms, how we eat, and our metabolic health. And about halfway through that, I started working with various different businesses. One in particular, I was the content director at a digital health platform called Human OS. And since that time, having graduated in 2018, I've been involved in many different projects, but most relevant to today, cofounded a nutrition business in 2020, which was called Resilient Nutrition. I was the chief science officer there, and I was in charge of all the science education stuff and formulating the products. And nowadays, I'm the CSO of a North American supplement startup, which is trying to help people live longer through careful selection of nutraceuticals. And over the years, I've coached people across a big spectrum, everyone from high functioning athletes to people with complex chronic health conditions. And in terms of other projects, I do a little bit of public speaking. I work with the data science business, which is trying to build predictive models to forecast change in chronic disease risk based on variables such as blood data. And I also help out with various different science communication projects, which is largely on an ad hoc basis, and I help a business that runs retreats. So I'll pause there, but the current common theme that runs through everything is how do you help people sustainably support their long term health and performance through personalized interventions. Yeah. That's great. I honestly, I didn't know some of that background about you, Greg. That's awesome. Thanks for sharing. Yeah. I'm, Seem, and, I have a background in anthropology, which, yeah, I studied, many years ago. And, you know, anthropology is just the study of humans in general that it involves many different aspects. And, yeah, after studying anthropology, I started to do, like, content online, full time. And, yeah, I've been doing YouTube for, you know, eight years. Or actually, nine years by now. So, yeah, I'm I'm a pretty long term YouTube content creator. I've written multiple books, not on just nutrition, but also, just health and fitness, and nine books, by now. So, yeah. I've been researching, nutrition for, you know, over ten years. At this point, I'm involved with a few, companies as well that are are gonna be launching later. But, yeah, it's in the realm of, health span and, longevity optimization. So, yeah, that's kind of the short story. Only nine books, you slacker. Well, the tenth one is coming out later, soon. Then I then I can, you know, say that I'm finished. On average, how long does it take you to write a book? Depends on the book. Let's say, my longest book, The Longevity Leap, which is the last one, took me eight months. It's, like, 500 pages, but I was writing pretty much eight hours a day Wow. For for for eight, nine months. Yeah. And, the other ones might take a a bit, shorter, so maybe four four months. Yeah. Yeah. That's a lot of work. Yeah. 10 books, nine books. I I don't know if I if I'd have that in me. That's, it's pretty impressive. Okay. Well, I guess the, the topic that we're gonna be talking about today is nutrition. So we've done a few other podcasts. We've discussed the supplementation side of things, the exercise side of things. And today, we're gonna be discussing the nutrition aspect of things. So I'm gonna run through, what I think kind of some questions that I've been thinking about for quite some time, and I think some questions that hopefully will help the average person as well as the person that's trying to kind of extend to the extremes because you have, especially in in the YouTube world, I know Seem knows this quite well and Greg knows this too, that, you're gonna have groups of people that aren't looking for the average. They're also looking for how to push the limits. So we'll try to address both within within the context of a single podcast. So let me start out with a kind of a hypothetical question. So let's say you're in a social setting and someone finds out that you're a leading health expert. So you just gave them the exact spiel that, we just gave. And then they ask you, well, what is the best diet? How would you respond? And I have a very particular answer for this, but I'm especially interested to hear how you guys would respond to that question. So again, what is the best diet? Let's start with you, Greg. Well, someone asked me that question, I'd say, I'm really sorry. I really need to pee. And then I just try and avoid them the rest of the evening. Okay. Great. Okay. You see him? If if it was forced on me, then I would give them a predictably boring nuanced answer, and I would say that it, of course, depends on lots of factors. A few of those, not all of them, include what the person's goals are. For example, someone who's trying to build muscle as quickly as possible is gonna take a different strategy from somebody who's trying to navigate some sort of chronic health condition. Another would be someone's current health status. If you have type two diabetes, then that might influence various aspects of your nutrition. Someone who's pregnant or breastfeeding has different nutrient needs and also how they eat is gonna influence various different metabolic and taste preference parameters in their offspring too. Then one would be ancestry, and this isn't something that we understand that well, but there's a little bit of evidence suggesting that someone's genetic background might be helpful in personalizing some aspects of their nutrition. There's research relating to things like how well people desaturate fatty acids and the number of copies of salivary alpha amylase they have and therefore how they respond to carbohydrate intake and so on. Another would just be someone's taste preferences. Not gonna force a diet on someone if the person hates the food that is present in the diet. Another would be someone's values. If, for example, someone is really interested in animal welfare and environment sustainability, then that might shape their food choices. Whereas if someone has just been following all the carnivores on YouTube, they might be a bit less fussed about that stuff. And then what has this person tried previously? If they haven't had success with a type of dietary strategy that I might otherwise have suggested, then that probably isn't gonna make much sense for them. And then just panning back, I'd say, in terms of the general dimensions of nutrition, and we can actually apply this across different lifestyle domains. I'd take a similar framework for sleep and physical activity too. I think there are a few dimensions that matter. So one of those would be the diet composition, and we can break that down in various ways, but it includes obviously things like the nutrition, so the macronutrition, carbohydrate, fat, protein, alcohol, and the micronutrition too. But there are also other factors in food that will influence various aspects of someone's biology, And those could include chemicals that are present in fungi, polyphenols in plants, do you have chemicals in animal foods? The list goes on. Another dimension would just be timing, And that's something that's only really received attention in recent years, and we can frame that in different ways. Commonly, people speak about what is colloquially referred to as the eating window, so the time lapse between when you first start consuming something that contains calories on a given day and when you finish your final calories for the day. I would call that the caloric period just because I'm a nerd. But within that, we can also look at the distribution of someone's energy intake. So you could have a fixed caloric period where in two conditions someone's eating from 10AM to 6PM, an eight hour window. But in one condition, much of the energy is front loaded within that window, and in another, it's loaded towards the end of the window. And then you could separately have an energy domain, but I put that in the composition bucket. And then finally, there's one kind of meta domain that applies to all of those, which is regularity. So how consistent is someone's diet timing and how consistent is their diet composition from day to day? And by this point, the person would have fallen asleep and then they wouldn't wanna speak to me. So I still would have won. That's an excellent answer, especially the last bit. No. Yeah, the way I think about it is actually very similar to to what you were getting to that there's so much nuance to it, that you'd have to dig in deeper. So I would say that I mean, I I had a much shorter answer at it like like a dinner party or social setting. I would just say that, that's that's impossible to answer in this short conversation that we're gonna have here, simply because of all the the reasons that you laid out, you know, looking at timing, looking at the circumstance, looking at the time of day. I mean, there's all kinds of different things that, that you can that you can, take into consideration. I don't know. What about what about you, Seem? How do you think about it? Yeah. I agree with that. It's, you know, super complex and super context dependent to the individual. I mean, the main framework and the principles are gonna be very similar, but there's always gonna be these small nuances in macros and types of foods they eat and meal frequency, etcetera, that depend on the individual. But I would like to maybe, let's say, frame it the way I was on Matt Kiberton's podcast a few months ago, who is one of the more renowned longevity researchers, and he asked me, like, okay, if you were to rank how much you eat, what you eat, and when do you eat, how in in importance, which one is the most important, which one is the least important. Then I said, what you eat and how much you eat, they're very equally important. But at the end of the day, it still matters how much you eat. And that that is still the most important thing because that determines whether you're gaining weight or losing weight, and whether or not you're gonna become obese or stay at a leaner body composition. And if we understand anything about health, then it is that obesity is bad. That being obese cuts down on your life expectancy and increases the risk of pretty much all other chronic diseases. So the number one goal of the diet would be to avoid obesity and excess adiposity. Now how much body fat do you need? That depends on your, biological sex. Like, are you male or female? There's research that for females, it matters a lot less how much body fat they have as long as they're not super obese. For males, it appears that you need to be slightly more leaner for health benefits. But, yeah, how much you eat determines your adiposity, regardless of what you eat, so to say. So if you're eating a very healthy diet, whatever you think that is, you're eating only whole foods, or you're eating only meat, or you're eating only plant foods, if you eat too much, then, you're gonna be gaining weight. And that's gonna eventually harm your overall health. It's gonna eventually result in excess visceral fat, excess adiposity, worse metabolic health, worse inflammation, etcetera. So the number one thing is at the top would be how much you eat, maintaining a semi calorie balance, and just adjusting your calorie intake based on your body fat percentages. That's how I just like to, roll that, okay. I see that you're gaining too much body fat. Reduce your food intake or increase your energy expenditure or something like that. If you see that you're becoming too skinny or too frail, you you wanna build muscle, then you just need to increase the calorie intake or increase carbohydrate or protein intake, whatever the case, may be. The second thing is, you know, what you eat. And, generally, it doesn't have to be something that is perfect. There's a lot of thought that you need to be on a this a 100% Puritan, diet that, nothing is processed and that everything is a 100% grass fed or organic whole food. I don't think that's the the case. If, your diet is 80% whole food, then that 20% of whatever processed foods isn't going to undermine the other components of your diet. And as long as you're in a calorie balance, it's not going to undermine your health as well. Now there are some little nuances there. If you're lean but you drink too much alcohol, which does contain calories, then, you might gain too much visceral fat, or you might have a little bit of fatty liver or too much, or too much too high triglycerides, whatever it is. So your blood work can still be suboptimal even at the lean body composition if you drink too much alcohol, for example. And that can apply to some other processed foods as well. You might be otherwise healthy and lean, but you consume too much sugar and you have prediabetic blood sugar levels or something like that. So there is, you know, still a principle of, eating predominantly whole foods that I think should be followed, but it doesn't have to be a 100% perfect. If it's 20 processed foods, 80% whole foods, I think that for most people is, like, possible. But, generally, like, let's say, 90% whole foods, 10% some processed foods is gonna be realistic for the average person because, it's just more easier to adopt in the modern world where there is a lot of processed foods. You're not gonna be always able to eat your grass fed steak with organic vegetables. So there needs to be some flexibility as well. And as long as you're not, I guess, mentally afraid or very stuck very stubborn about your diet, then, you can pull off with, you know, let's say, a 10% suboptimal diet because it's not going to undermine the rest of your diet. And the last component is, when you eat, you know, I'm a huge fan of independent fasting. I'm a huge fan of circadian rhythms and time restricted eating. And I do think that it has an important role in health, but I would still put it at the bottom of the totem pole that it's important, but it's not the most important thing. Calories matter the most. What you eat comes then, and the last part is, when you eat. So the general framework here would be that don't eat in the middle of the night, the the biological nighttime for humans, that you wanna consume most of your calories or or all of your calories during the biological daytime, you don't need to do some sort of intermittent fasting. But, you know, let's say within one hour of waking until few hours before bed should be the eating window for, most people. Now, of course, some people can't follow that that they're doing shift work or they have some jet lag or something like that, and there are ways to, go around it. But, generally, you should try to eat in a way that makes you consume 99% of your calories during the biological, daytime. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices, which are the one charge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes. They do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin antiaging, hormone optimization, pain management, and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes, especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the Bond Charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most regular Therapeuticers don't have the right wavelengths of light, which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Boncharge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research, and they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code SIIM, s I I m, for a 15% discount. That is an incredibly good answer. I I love the rank order of how you think about that, because I think in a short conversation I would have with someone, if I was forced into giving an answer, that would be exactly how I'd think about it too. Looking at the amount of consumption, then the what's involved in that consumption, what are the the nutrients, and then from there, looking at timing. And on the timing front, if I can just dig into that just a little bit more before we go on to the the other questions because this is something that I've thought about a good amount in relation to intermittent fasting. I think you guys would have a really great perspective on this that maybe something I've never considered. There's I don't know if you guys have run across the literature showing that, intermittent fasting tends to be, this is this is the way it's it's put out there. It's not necessarily my opinion or the way I think about it, but that intermittent fasting is more beneficial if a person consumes their food earlier in the day compared to later in the day. Have you guys run across that literature or just run across that idea? Well, Craig is the mister time sheet eating. So Yeah. For sure. You know? Nick, if if you wanted to, you could find hours and hours and hours of podcasts of me boring people to tears about that subject. So, yeah, I've come across it. Okay. Okay. Good. So that's great. Could could you could you quote, unquote bore us with with with your take, Ralph? Because I I I would be genuinely really interested in that. Well, I'll I'll give you a hot take, but I'll first just return to something that seemed first raised, and that is just that we need to bear in mind that these different dimensions speak to each other. And these different pyramids have been around for a while where people try to rank the relative importance of different things, and Eric Helms published one of those probably about a decade ago now, which largely aligns with what you guys were saying, but I think what is sometimes missed in that conversation, and I agree for the most part with what he said and what you guys were saying there is that these different dimensions do speak to each other. And, actually, if you speak about focusing on energy intake, then that can cause people to start thinking, well, okay. I will just start trying to count calories then so that I hit my energy intake target, and then within that, I can eat what I want. And that's typical of a type of IIFYM if it fits your macros approach. And that can work well for some people, but some people really struggle with that type of approach too. And so I just emphasize that sometimes if you focus on timing and macronutrition or specific food choices, then energy intake comes along for the ride. And you see that with time restricted eating across different studies on average if people use time restricted eating, which depending on how we define it, is confining all your daily calorie intake to a period of twelve hours or less each day. Whereas in my mind, intermittent fasting is something different. It's occasionally used for a fast of twenty four hours or longer, but that's not the way that most people use that term. But if people use time restricted eating, they'll slightly reduce their food intake. And then similarly, if people are focusing on, say, consuming more dietary protein or more dietary fiber, then they would tend to reduce their total energy intake too relative to how they were eating previously. So just something to bear in mind. In terms of time restricted eating and early versus late time restricted eating, I do think that there are some small benefits to be had from front loading intake for many people, but the effects are modest. The early work on this that was compelling was done by Courtney Peterson, and she published some work on this in one of the cell journals in 2018 that was done in adult men with prediabetes. And she had these guys restrict their food intake such as they were finishing their daily food intake by 3PM. And within a relatively short period of time, they had a dramatic change in their blood pressure. It was about a 10 millimeter drop in 10 millimeter of mercury drop in blood pressure, which is equivalent to what you get from a lot of hypotensive drugs. And they also had some improvements in insulin sensitivity and some markers of inflammation. And importantly, in that particular study, they tried to control the diet such that they didn't change their total energy intake. So those effects were independent of any change in energy intake. And there probably was a small effect on energy intake, but it was very modest and it certainly didn't explain those results. And What do people think it's To me, that study highlights a theme that's come up a few times in that type of research, which is that the people who stand to benefit most from this type of approach are probably people who are relatively sedentary, who don't have great metabolic health. And so for the three of us sat here, do I think that early time restricted eating would yield any sort of meaningful benefit in our health parameters? No. I don't think it would because it interacts with your physical activity and your general health and a variety of other factors too. The rationale behind front loading intake in that way is based on circadian circadian biology by and large. If you look, for example, at oral glucose tolerance, then going by work by people like Frank Shear, it varies quite a lot over the course of the circadian day, and for the most part, it's higher in the biological morning than it is in the biological evening. And the thermic effect of feeding, so the amount of energy that it takes you to digest and metabolize food tends to be higher in the biological morning too. So you burn a little bit more energy, everything else controlled for. There are fluctuations like that across the course of the day that suggests that front loading intake is going to make some sense. There are some other facts at play too, like there's the second meal effect. The idea being that a previous meal that you've had shortly before your present meal will slightly reduce responses and blood sugar to that second meal. So actually in terms of distribution of energy intake and carbohydrate in particular, I'd argue that the meal where you want to concentrate most of those calories and carbohydrates is probably the second meal of the day lunch. So having a big lunch works well for a lot of people. However, coming back to physical activity, if, for example, someone was working out after they finished the working day, they get to the gym at 6PM, and they've tried this type of early time restricted eating approach. And then they either skip dinner or they have a tiny dinner after they just depleted loads of muscle glycogen and induce lots of muscle damage, and their metabolic health is otherwise good. I don't think that that makes any sense. So you have to take on a person by person basis. One thing to bear in mind comes back to what I began this boring answer with, which is that we eat different things at different times of day too. And so one of the effects of early time restricted eating might be some modest changes in people's food choices. This hasn't been very clearly shown by the research. I suspect that we would find this given adequate power and appropriate food recall methods. But take the example of alcohol. Not that many people are mainlining beer at breakfast. And so if you're using early time restricted eating and you're having a freakishly early dinner, you're finishing your dinner by 4PM, and previously you were having a glass of wine on the sofa at 07:30PM, you're probably gonna end up drinking less alcohol, just as one example. So I think it is gonna affect dietary choices too and possibly, therefore, the quality of someone's diet. But just to reiterate that hasn't been that well demonstrated yet. That's just one study that I mentioned. There are other studies that we could go into, but I like that because it was very rigorously done. There are two or three other rigorous studies. There are a bunch of null findings too in the literature. There's not really ever been strong evidence that late time restricted eating, where, for example, someone was beginning their first calorie consumption at 1PM and finishing at 9PM is superior to early time restricted eating. One more thing to bear in mind is that this is gonna interact with how you distribute the calories and the macronutrients within the eating window too. So take two hypothetical examples. One of them is early time restricted eating, and your eating window is from 9AM until 3PM. But your 9AM dietary event contains a 100 calories, and then you have a small snack at midday, and then your final meal contains 3,000 calories. So it's back loaded within the early window. So the center of mass of your food intake is actually right around 3PM. You could also have late time restricted eating where your window starts at 1PM, finishes at 10PM. But you have all your calories at 1PM, And then the rest of the day, you eat like a bird, and you have a total of 200 calories. Sensor of mass there is earlier than it is in the early time restricted eating condition. So as always, there are nuances to this stuff. If you can make early time restricted eating work, your metabolic health isn't great, you're relatively physically inactive, then I think it's a good strategy for a lot of people. Otherwise, if you wanna get some of the benefits of early time restricted eating, then I'd probably focus more on the distribution of your calories. And so you can have a longer eating window, but the idea is just that your first couple of meals are probably gonna concentrate a lot of your food intake. Yeah. Thanks for that. It's a lot of context. The I've always been a bit critical. Maybe I haven't looked at all the literature on this topic, but I've been a bit critical of some of the comparisons between the late time restricted versus early time restricted in that I've always wondered if some of the measurements that researchers do, especially in the fasted state the next day, isn't biased by the fact of exactly that last point that you pointed out that potentially a person's just backloading a lot of their calories, a lot of their food consumption much later in the day. And if you were to even compare that against a control group, that is designed to space out their meals across three meals throughout the entire day, then the amount of food that they're consuming at the very end of the day is vastly different from what the group that restricts their consumption to later in the day would would be consuming. So doing fasted measurements of, like, glucose and insulin and using measures like HOMA IR, I think could be misleading in terms of how we were interpreting a lot of the benefits that, that come from some of this time restricted eating or some of the the the the advantages that we give to, I suppose, we'll say, I guess, the intermittent fasting period being later in the day as opposed to earlier in the day. So this study that, that you described, I'm not sure if I I read it. Maybe I didn't. It's been a while since I've looked at that literature. But I'd be curious. So so what you're saying is that there are other independent, more sensitive metrics that are not dependent on the timing or not dependent on this this loading of food at the end of the day versus earlier in the day, we still are able to distinguish that there are maybe some slight benefits with eating food earlier in the day compared to later in the day. Yeah. Just to reiterate, I'm just saying that for people with poor metabolic health in general, having an earlier eating window, controlling for everything else tends to lead to slightly greater improvements in metabolic health parameters than putting it later in the day. I just wanna pick up on a couple of things that you mentioned there too. So one is that if you look at some of the null studies, and probably the highest profile of these was in the New England Journal of Medicine a few years ago, they've probably not found anything because the contrast between the groups hasn't been big enough. So some of these studies that have said, well, time restricted eating doesn't lead to weight loss or metabolic health improvements. When you look at the eating windows between groups, the people in the control group, their eating window is twelve or thirteen hours, and the people in the experimental group, their eating window is ten hours. And so the difference in groups is just really small. And so to actually see these types of benefits, there needs to be a substantial change between the groups. And that explains some of those null findings, not all of them necessarily. And then you mentioned HOMA IR, so homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance. Something to bear in mind with these types of studies is that the food that you consume is a time cue, a Zeitgebber, that sets many of the clocks in your circadian system, the peripheral clocks that influence all sorts of local processes and tissues such as skeletal muscle, the liver, the gut, and so on. And those clocks basically function to schedule a timetable of events each day, when to build things, when to break things out, when to break things down, and so on. And so given that, these studies that manipulate food time are gonna shift some of those clocks too potentially. On top of that, when some sort of test is done at the end of an intervention, so let's say that it's a glucose tolerance test, the period of time that's elapsed between the final meal on the previous day and the test isn't necessarily standardized, which is something that's worth bearing in mind. And so you've potentially got a shift in the timing of those peripheral clocks, and you might have a much longer fasting interval from the final meal on the previous day to the test. And so there's some noise that's often not accounted for. I don't wanna get bogged down in the experimental weeds, but I just wanna highlight that there are nuances to this stuff. And it's actually quite hard, I think, for a lot of people to work out where the weeds are because they they don't have a relevant scientific background, and they might not be that familiar with the literature of thought very deeply about those subjects. It's that it's that last point that is the one that I get hung up on because that's that's the one where I question some of the validity of some of the the results that have come out from some of the intermittent fasting literature. Exactly that, that the timing between tests so that the the ending meal being completely calorie laden versus a meal that's much less calorie laden, but the the calories across the day are still equated. And then the next day, you do a fasting measurement of blood sugar, insulin, and then you do some of these proxy measures, and then you try to come to a conclusion with that. To me, it it seems like there's a there's a good opportunity there for us, you use the word noise, to get a lot of of noise in those measurements that, that we're not really accounting for. So I don't know. Anyway, it was it was great to get your perspective. Seem, what how do you feel about the whole late intermittent fasting versus early intermittent fasting considering, your extensive experience with it? Yeah. I've done, you know, different versions of that myself. In a few years ago, I had, 8PM dinner or something like that and my first one at 1PM. Now I'm doing an earlier variation. I have my dinner at like four or 5PM and, first one is, 10AM. So I I do think that from my own experience and earlier time machine eating window is better for sleep, at least subjectively. I sleep better. My sleep scores are a bit better, and, maybe digestion a bit better as well. So that's my own subjective experience from that. But I think that, at the end of the day, it comes down to the totem pole that, you know, you can't say that someone who is even in a calorie deficit and eating a healthy diet, but they're having their eating window quite late in the day that they're somehow unhealthier or that they're in a worse health condition compared to someone who is overeating calories but doing it early in the day. Right? So the hierarchy of, these three factors in a matter still at the end of the day. And, unfortunately, a lot of other studies yet, I feel, haven't completely controlled for all of these factors and variables that the calorie content, I think, is a huge, important aspect here. But the problem here is that most people who are doing late time restricted eating, they tend to follow the pattern that they are backloading pretty much all their calories later in the day as a diet adherence tool. So the reason they skip food in the early part of the day is that they can have a large dinner and not gain weight because it's like a diet adherence tool. For some people, it's easier to say no to all foods for the entire day and then eat whatever. That's that's one strategy that people like to do. Some people have a different, let's say, preference, but, I guess that's why most people do late time machine learning as a diet adherence tool, that they have a lot of calories to eat in the dinner without gaining weight, so they can eat whatever they want pretty much. And, you know, it's hard to yell. There hasn't been, like, the perfect study to actually, I guess, address that, component. From a physiological perspective, I do think that having a bit earlier eating window is probably better from, like, a circadian rhythm perspective because, you know, if you eat a massive dinner at 10PM and you go to bed at 11PM, let's say, for example, then I do feel that it might shift your circadian rhythm slightly later because, you know, exercise does do that. If you exercise earlier in the day, you shift your circadian rhythm earlier. If exercise later in the day, you shift it later. So and food is a huge regulator of the circadian clocks as well. So I think that they should at least a few hours before bed where you stop eating. Now you don't have to, like, have breakfast or anything. You can still skip breakfast and have lunch and dinner, but, in my opinion, I just it might be better to just not have, dinner, immediately before bed. Can I just chime in with a few quick thoughts, Nick? I I don't wanna get too hung up on this stuff because I realize that there are many other things that we wanna get to. But one of the things that I was just thinking about is that having a big dinner is culturally normal in much of Western Europe and North America. And so we have to think about how dietary patterns and food timing interface with norms and with people's lives too. So what Seymour is saying there, I think a lot of that is just the function of the environments in which we grew up in. And if people are otherwise doing things very well and they end up having the largest proportion of their daily food intake in terms of their meals at their final meal of the day, then it's not a big deal. Another key point is that the size of the eating window does seem to somewhat relate to energy intake. So the smaller the window, the smaller the food intake tends to be. And this raises an important point, which is that time restricted eating isn't for everyone. This is not something that I would recommend to someone who's got a history of disordered eating or eating disorders, for example, someone who's overly restricted their food in some way previously. It's also something that's probably not conducive to achieving an appropriate energy balance in some contexts. So if someone had chronic low energy availability, they have relative energy deficiency, could be in sport, could be another context, and they were trying to get pregnant. Saying that they should have an eight hour eating window, I think, is probably silly for the most part. And then what Zim was saying about the size of the final meal, I this hasn't been studied to my knowledge even though it's something that I think a lot of people have thought about for years, but I wonder if that interacts with energy availability. So take an extreme example. You've got someone who's preparing for a bodybuilding contest and deep into their prep, they're ravenous most of the time. And if they go to bed really, really hungry, they're gonna struggle to sleep. Well, in that context, might it make sense for them to consume the biggest share of their daily food intake at dinner? I think it might do. So we just need to bear in mind that type of person specificity. Anyway, I'll pipe down now. Yeah. That's good. Yeah. We've we've definitely gone down the intermittent fasting rabbit hole, but I think it is it's important. I think a lot of people use it, and a lot of people are considering using it. So it's a it's an area of nutrition that should be discussed. It's funny that we started out by discussing calories, at least Seema and I and Greg, I think, for the most part also. And we discussed, you know, the amount of intake is the most important and the the nutrients that you consume and then the timing, and then we ended up going down a a rabbit hole on on timing specifically. It's, it's pretty apt. Okay. So let's move on to the the next question. So if we were to get more specific, let's say now you had all the time in the world, and I'm breaking this up into three separate goals that a person might have. One of them is one person wants to be in the top 1% of longevity. Another person wants to be the top 1% of athletics. And then, of course, you could probably break that up into the types of athletics as well. And then one person just wants to have general well-being, just wants to be generally healthy, live a pretty long life, but isn't necessarily concerned with every morsel of food that they consume. How would they differ in terms of your approach to giving advice or just general recommendations that you would give, those three individuals? Do you, you wanna start it off, Zane? Yeah. Well, for athleticism, it depends a lot on the sports. For sumo wrestler, the diet is different than for a gymnast. And, sumo wrestler, there, you know, there's research that they have substantially short term life expectancy than the average Japanese person. So, Yeah. Let's say not sumo wrestling, but, I don't know, track and field, because it's kind of similar to a general healthy lifestyle. So they're more, similar across the groups. I would say that for an athlete, biggest difference from a general diet is that they just end up eating more carbohydrates and end up eating more calories overall. Now an athlete typically needs to maintain a lower body fat percentage for a better body weight, like a force ratio. So a track and field athlete is, you know, pretty lean. So they aren't eating a ton of calories, but they're probably eating more calories than, an average person who doesn't exercise just because they exercise a lot more. So the biggest differences between the person would be they eat more carbohydrates, they maybe eat more protein because they have more lean muscle tissue, and they eat more calories to fuel their workouts. And, for an athlete, the meal frequency, I imagine, is also more relevant than to a general person. An athlete, you know, depends on the sport specifically, but, if they want to, let's say, maximize muscle anabolism and recovery, then they probably have to end up eating more frequently, especially protein. So they might have four protein meals a day spreading out their protein. Whereas for an average person, spreading out the protein is a bit less important. So they can have, let's say, two, three meals, whereas an athlete might have four, five, six meals depending on their particular situation. And, I don't think an average person needs to be on some low carb diet or restrict all carbohydrates, but they probably just end up eating less carbohydrates because they're burning less glycogen as well, and they're a bit less insulin sensitive. And an athlete probably is able to consume a lot of more simple sugars. So they they might have a Gatorade or some sugar gel during their workout to, replenish their glycogen faster, whereas an average person never needs to do that. They don't need to have Skittles during their thirty minute Pilates class or something like that. And for general health and longevity, it depends also, yeah. Like what you like to eat. If you want to maximize well-being and enjoyment in life, then you also need to consider the enjoyment of eating. You know, when you eat, with who you eat, whether or not you consume alcohol or not, and what kind of food you eat. You know, having pizza with family over a glass of wine or something like that it's it's a it could be considered like a wellness inter not intervention, but, event because you're getting some mental health benefits or relaxation. You're just enjoying yourself. Whereas for an athlete, it's probably out of the question because they need to focus on their sports, especially in, like, competitive season. For it's quite interesting in the top one percent longevity space. You know, some people would argue that, okay, never no alcohol, never pizza, never no kind of a junk food, but I would argue that it's also important in the longevity area because, because of the socialization and the mental health benefits. It's very underrated in, in, like, the online longevity discussion, just the just the mental health benefits of, you know, socializing and, letting it go every once in a while. Now, of course, if you're developing fatty liver and becoming diabetic from eating too much, processed food or alcohol, then, yeah, it's counterproductive. But an otherwise healthy person, they can have a glass of wine, let's say, once a week. They can have a slice of pizza once a week, and it shouldn't have any detrimental effects on their blood work or long term health if they're otherwise healthy. Now it depends on there's a spectrum of people with their health, but let's say a top one percent health individual, they can get away with it, and they don't have to necessarily manically obsess over that. So you don't you essentially don't have to be Brian Johnson to to get into that top 1% then. Right. Okay. Yeah. That that totally makes sense. What about you, Greg? How do you think about it? Quite similarly for the most part. I would say comparing those three scenarios, the longevity diet is generally going to be the most strict and it might focus on a few things. So it might focus in particular on diet quality, so the density of micronutrients and other health promoting substances in food, whatever those might be. It might also start to look to some of the different processes that seem to be driving aging and how nutrition intersects with those. I think nutrition is relevant to some of those, Things like autophagy, just to name one example. And then it would probably also focus more on quantification of health parameters and then trying to use nutrition changes to nudge things into ranges that we think are more optimal. So if, for example, someone's APOB and their non HDL cholesterol are running a bit high, then that might indicate certain dietary changes. If someone's triglycerides are a bit high, if they're a bit insulin resistance, all those types of things. The general well-being approach is gonna be a bit like a more flexible version of that, and it would be about sustaining health and performance, but also with plenty of focus on enjoyment. And so I think in this type of instance, it's helpful to understand something about how to keep things in check when when you do flex a bit. And I mentioned IIFYM earlier. I think that one thing that people can take from that, irrespective of who they are, is that when you do veer off your plan, if you have a plan, then you're just trying to keep your total food intake in check and maybe have some strategies to support that because it's quite easy for the wheels to come off entirely during certain events, Christmas, Thanksgiving, that type of thing. And so at those times, I would just focus on trying to be quite close to your calorie targets and possibly your protein and fiber targets too, if I was to focus on certain things. And then when it comes to athletes, I completely agree with what Sien was saying about total energy intake and carbohydrate intake and also the importance of the specific athletic discipline or sport that someone is competing in. But when you put that to the side, the only other things I'd probably mention would be that it can be helpful to have a more targeted approach. So the same way that we speak about periodization with training, there's been a lot of discussion about nutritional periodization in the last decade or so. So trying to manipulate, in particular, macronutrients in accordance with training sessions to facilitate certain outcomes. So doing some training sessions in a state of low carbohydrate availability, for example, to promote biochemical changes to support fat oxidation, just as one instance. And then there are probably some small differences between athletes and non athletes in addition to their energy needs and maybe the optimal carbohydrate intake in their micronutrient needs. So if you take the example of someone who's sweating a lot and is undergoing loads of muscle contractions, many more than someone who's more sedentary, then they're probably gonna need slightly higher levels of certain micronutrients. But I think seem otherwise nailed it. And and those would be the only things that I'd add to that. How about you, Nick? I should say Nick the impaler. Sorry. For for anybody who's completely confused about that, so that is a prepodcast discussion. It has to do going back to my murderous tendencies. Anyway, moving on. Okay. No. I I I think I almost completely agree. I can't think of anything. I mean, obviously, if you if we were to have an entire podcast about how to be a top 1% longevity individual, there's plenty of nuances that we could get into, but in general, how do we separate the three? I I I agree with, how you guys think about it. However, for the vast majority of people who are not necessarily trying to get into that top 1% of either. They're not trying to be, the the top 1% in the rec league, where they're absolutely destroying everybody around them. And they're also not necessarily trying to maximize their lifespan at the expense of of, certain enjoyments. How do you guys think about some of the basics? So if a person comes to you and they're like, okay, here's my goal. I just want to live a long, healthy life. I wanna be relatively, happy with my food choices. I I I don't mind making a small adjustments here and there. And you had to rank order the emphasis of how a person should think about things. So let's, go with, like, calories, protein, fat, carbohydrates, micronutrients, things of that nature. Is there how how do you go about advising a person that, that just wants to live a generally healthy life? And then after that, I'm gonna, dive into that a little bit more, add some more context. Yeah. Well, I would start start with figuring out how much of, let's say, what would be their target goals for their body weight to eat. And, this doesn't have to involve, you know, tracking and measuring foods and tracking macros. It would initially just involve, okay, let's figure out what is your optimal body weight. If someone is, let's say, ten kilos overweight, we need to figure out, what would be their ideal body weight for longevity. And, that's generally pretty easy to figure out. We know, like, okay, certain waist circumference is more optimal and, hip to waist waist to hip ratio, body fat percentage, those kind of things. So let's try to get you to an ideal body weight, whatever that may be. And the most important thing, like I mentioned earlier, for that is the amount of food you eat. So it doesn't matter what you eat. If you're gaining weight, then you need to eat less or you need to change some other variable that would prevent you from gaining weight and help you to reach the ideal body weight. And usually, it just means cutting out certain foods or reducing certain, foods. And, you know, the easiest things to cut out are carbohydrates and fats because, you usually don't wanna cut out on protein because most people are eating less protein than would be optimal. And, you know, carbohydrates aren't inherently essential. And, fat is essential, but you don't need it like a ton of fat. There's a threshold of fat you need. So if you wanna lose weight, then, reducing some of the fat and carbohydrate intake will help you to achieve that. And, people oftentimes don't know how much carbs and fats certain foods have. So here, they could go through, like, a short period of time of measuring things and quantifying things just to educate themselves about the macronutrient composition of different foods. You know, I've done it a few times in my life. And, by doing that, you just develop this, you know, third skill or this a spidey sense about foods that you you don't need to weigh the food. But because you know, okay, whatever, chicken breast or steak, I approximately know how many calories it has because of a past reference, and you don't have to weigh it again. But just having skill is something that most people lack. They never weigh the food. They think that, you know, some people even don't know that, I don't know, that bread is a high carb food. I think, you know, most people know that, but, you know, that you can imagine that the average person has no idea how much calories a piece of steak has. But, developing that skill is very useful, especially for people who want to, you know, achieve very, lean body composition and, and to just improve their health or become aware of what they're eating. For so, yeah, just eat as much you need to maintain the optimal body composition. If you need to lose weight, then you need to eat less. If you need to gain weight, you're too underweight, then you're just you know, you can eat more food. The next component would be protein. You know, the research about the optimal amount of protein is, I think, pretty, solid or pretty consistent that it's around 1.6 grams per kilogram per day of, of body weight. So that's around, 0.74 grams per pound. So it's a lot less than some bodybuilders recommend, which is the one gram per pound. I think that's more than enough. And for maximum muscle hypertrophy, the intake of one point six grams per kilogram appears to be enough. Now some people respond better if they eat more, but, for the average person, I think that's already more than enough or just general health. If they eat less, then that's also fine, but, they don't need to eat more protein. And then the rest of the calories can come from carbs or fats depending on their incidence, sensitivity, depending on their exercise demand, depending on the preference. If they don't like to eat a lot of I don't know, butter or olive oil, they can swap it with some carbohydrates or fruits or something like that. So, yeah, the ratios of fats and carbs, I think, matter the least. The most important thing is the calories. Then the second is protein, and the fats and carbs are the third. I do think that the fiber intake is very underrated. For the average person, fiber is super beneficial and, will improve, the satiety component of dieting. They'll tend to eat less calories, they'll feel more full, they'll have better gut health, and, metabolic health markers also tend to improve with increased fiber intake. So just get a lot of foods from, or get a lot of your, let's say, calories from fruits and vegetables, berries, whole grains, tubers, those kind of things are generally positive for the average person. That's great. Yeah. That's a that's a great way to think about it. And we're gonna get into more specifics on what makes a good or bad protein, good or bad fat, good or bad carbohydrates. So you're alluding to to some of that with, fibers is a great example, so we'll get into that. Greg, how do you how do you think about it? Very similarly, fundamentally. So I would also begin by trying to find out what the person is trying to accomplish, and typically some of that is going to relate to weight maintenance or weight gain or weight loss, and then look at their existing food intake using some sort of appropriate measure and try and understand something about their weight trajectory and then make some changes accordingly. Regarding tracking, I think that it's helpful for almost everyone to track at some point or at least to spend plenty of time understanding food labels for the reasons that Singh pointed out. But after a certain point, you should get to a stage where you just don't have to do any of that stuff because you're not gonna look back on your life and think I wish that I'd spent more time on my fitness pal. In terms of the rates of gain and loss, it's gonna vary quite a lot between people. But if I had to throw out some generic numbers, then I'd suggest that a rate of loss of no more than about 1% of body mass per week is gonna work quite well for a lot of people just because the more rapid the weight loss, the more likely you are to lose fat free mass, which you're trying to hold on to. The exceptions to that would be someone who has a lot of adipose tissue at the start. So maybe someone who's got class two obesity or class three obesity, they've got very high BMI. They can lose weight more rapidly initially with lower risk of losing fat free mass. But also, sometimes if someone's been quite stagnant in their progress for some time, losing weight more rapidly initially can kick start their motivation. And then suddenly they buy more into some of the lifestyle changes that you're trying to suggest. Regarding how you achieve that change in energy balance, there are different ways that you can go about it. So you could prescribe specific macronutrient targets, but I generally don't necessarily start with that and focus a bit more on diet composition. And like seems that I tend to start by looking at someone's protein intake. And I think the optimal protein intake varies quite a lot between people. I won't go into that now. We'll come back to it. But because of protein's effects on appetite control, it can be very helpful in the context of weight loss, not just for the retention of fat free mass. And then fat and carbohydrate, I think you can tinker with. As Sim said, carbohydrate technically isn't essential, but that doesn't mean that it doesn't serve all sorts of very important functions. The one box that you have to check is just making sure that someone is getting enough of the essential fatty acids. Essential meaning that your body can't synthesize them by itself from precursors. So once those are satisfied, you can play around quite a lot with the ratios between fatty carbohydrates, trying to come up with something that's appropriate for the person, which might be influenced by some other information that you have about their health status, conditions they're trying to manage, etcetera. And I find in practice, a lot of the advice that I end up giving people that I work with is surprisingly consistent between people. Like, a lot of people benefit from increasing the protein content of their breakfast, just as one example, and by reducing the number of liquid calories that they consume, whether it's drinking soft drinks or drinking something that masquerades as being a health food. And then in terms of people who are trying to gain weight, I think the optimal rate of gain is probably gonna be a bit lower than the optimal rate of loss just to try and shift the partitioning in favor of gaining relatively more fat free mass and less fat mass. The exception to that might just be someone who's in a state of chronic low energy availability, in which case the game changes quite a lot, and you might try and gain at a faster rate, and there might be less guidance about specific food choices and things because you're actually trying to get the person to be more flexible in general and maybe to stop labeling items as good or bad and so on if someone has some disordered eating tendencies. So, again, very similar to scene. I think that the sequence that I go through is pretty much identical, actually. How about you, Nick? Unfortunately, I have to echo everything you guys said again. I guess, in a way, it's a good thing because, hopefully, it doesn't confuse people. That's that's the way I think about things too, that focusing on nutrition patterns, focusing on calories, typically getting a person especially if a person has never counted calories before. You said this earlier, Greg, that you'd a person doesn't have to count calories, and I think the vast majority of people probably almost definitely don't have to be counting calories. But if you don't have any experience understanding, well, how much you're actually consuming, I think calorie counting and learning how to read a nutrition label can be invaluable. It can really open your eyes in how you generally think about, nutrition. So for general health, I think that's a good starting point. Maybe do it for three days. That's how like, in my nutrition courses, they said three days, do two days within the week, and then one day on the weekend at the minimum. Maybe you can extend that out to seven days, because in the grand scheme of things, you know, seven days out of your entire life being strict about counting calories and just understanding where you are. That's the starting point. Just get a baseline. Understand your weight. Understand how many calories you're consuming. Understanding the mac the macronutrients that you're consuming without trying to make any sort of changes. And once you have that baseline, then from there, you can start to make a lot of these adjustments. You have to think to yourself, okay. Well, if I eat a lot of vegetables and a lot of fruits, for some reason, I get really bloated all the time. Then you can start to get into, okay, well, what foods am I consuming that's that's causing a lot of these, like, gastrointestinal discomfort and whatnot? So you address those issues and you get a a bit of a baseline on, okay, what kind of foods can I eat? What kind of foods can't I eat? And then you start getting into, okay. Now I'm gonna start focusing on trying to up my protein, let's say, for breakfast and just kinda general recommendations like that. And it's it's pretty remarkable, especially for a person who is overweight, how much of a difference that can make. And if a person really likes calorie counting, maybe that's something that they start adopting. But I think for for the vast majority of people, that's definitely not necessary. If you enjoy it, it's something I enjoy doing. So I will be spending the rest of my life in MyFitnessPal. But for for many others, it's, it's not for them, which is which is definitely understandable. So, yeah, calories and just your general nutrition, then focusing on protein, just kind of putting in more protein, especially for breakfast and and for lunch. And then fats and carbohydrates, I think they're they're a lot more interchangeable. Obviously, you have to have a certain amount of fats, but it's it's not as much as as people think. And usually you get that from consuming a lot of the other foods that you're gonna be consuming, unless you're specifically consuming, an incredibly dry plant based diet, in which case, maybe you won't get the the right fats that you're supposed to get, which actually segues, perfectly into, talking about these macronutrients a little bit more specifically. So we talked about we talked about protein being pretty important, and we're actually gonna be touching on that, in in more depth in relation to longevity and and the, you know, the the different camps of low protein and high protein. I know Greg has quite a few thoughts on that. So, tune in for that folks. I'm very curious on on your thoughts on that. But when we think about these three macronutrients, so we've talked about protein a little bit. We haven't really discussed fats and we haven't really discussed carbohydrates. But when you frame protein, fats, and carbohydrates, what are, I hate to use the words, good and bad forms, but just for simplicity, what are good and bad forms of protein that you aim for and what you try to avoid and the same thing with fats and carbohydrates. Do you wanna start us off, Greg? Yeah. That's a loaded question. I don't wanna label foods as being good or bad, but protein is an interesting one because the reality is that depending on which of the protein quality indices that you look at, animal source proteins tend to be higher quality than plant based ones. And the different protein indices that have been put forward largely relate to two things. One of them is the balance of amino acids in the particular protein, amino acids being the building blocks of those proteins. And another is the digestibility of the protein and therefore how available those amino acids are. And animal sources like eggs and meat and fish and seafood and dairy have well balanced profiles with sufficient quantities of all of the essential amino acids that your body can't knit together. And they also don't have lots of things that could interfere with your ability to take up those amino acids. So things like the amino acids being bound to fibers and so on. So they are certainly good protein sources if we put aside some of the other health related factors that come with amino acids. The issue with plants is that there aren't that many plants that technically complete proteins by themselves because they tend to either be short in the amino acid lysine or methionine. And people have spoken about how maybe this explains some of the disposition for cultures in much of the world to put together grains with pulses, rice and peas or rice and beans that you see in many traditional dietary patterns. Because by combining those foods, you can balance out those profiles. And on a per meal basis, that does make a lot of sense. But I think when it comes to people who are consuming vegan diets and therefore not consuming any of those animal source proteins, actually, what really matters is what goes on over the whole day. We have to think about nutrition over longer timescales. I think we get a bit hung up in terms of the day. So if you're thinking about changing your body weight, for example, the important thing is your energy balance over the week. It's over longer timescales. With protein, I think the optimal in terms of changes in lots of protein balance would be to have a series of well spaced boluses of proteins. Probably the optimal frequency is probably something like one bonus every four hours or so. There's this refractory period immediately post ingestion where you can't keep stimulating your muscles to take up more amino acids and Phil Atherton and others did a lot of the early work showing that. So it's something like point four grams of a complete protein source per kilogram of body weight every four hours or so. Therefore, one could argue that it would be hard to do that consuming isolated plant foods. And therefore, if you are a vegan bodybuilder, you might need to pay a bit more attention to appropriately combining different sources of plant proteins. But for the vast majority of the population, that's a non issue. And daily intake is the thing that matters and provided that your diet is quite diverse, you don't need to worry about it too much. I do think that people consuming plant based diets might need slightly more protein just because of that difference in protein quality. I don't think it'd be a big difference, and this hasn't been very well studied. But maybe it's something to the tune of point one or point two grams per kilogram per day to reach equivalence with someone that's consuming animal source proteins. But, of course, that depends on the distribution and so on. There are rare exceptions where there are a few plant based proteins that do contain complete amino acid profiles. My favorite is the humble potato. Potatoes actually have a great amino acid profile. Corn is also really high in leucine. So leucine is this trigger that basically stimulates the potential to build more muscle tissue. You can think of it as being a bit like a construction site or skeletal muscles where leucine is like bringing someone in to then order people to put bricks in the wall. And without leucine, you can't initiate that. And one of the reasons why animal source proteins are so good is because of their relatively high leucine content, but there are these exceptional plant foods where they do actually have quite a lot of leucine in them. So that would be something to bear in mind if you're on a vegan diet, but in general, good plant sources of protein include things like various different soy products. And unless you're consuming truly heroic quantities, you don't need to worry about phytoestrogens and stuff and sources like tempeh and tofu are perfectly good sources. And then otherwise, vegans probably get quite a lot of their protein from things like pulses, so lentils and different beans. And it might be that some people also wanna include a a protein supplement if they're vegan and their health concern, I think they they can be helpful, probably more so than the omnivores among us. Not essential necessarily, but if you're struggling to meet your protein targets, then they can be a helpful addition. And choosing something that includes multiple different plant based sources, I think makes good sense. There's also a separate category of protein rich foods, namely the insects, which has become something some people have been interested in the last few years because they are actually quite protein dense and they don't taste too bad, but obviously the thought of eating insects is enough to make some people squirm. And then in terms of good sources of fats, I think fat often comes along for the ride and you don't need to worry too much about specific sources with the exception of trying to manage specific blood lipid phenotypes. So if your triglycerides were really high, for example, or your LDL cholesterol was very high. And I think in general, favoring leaner cuts of meat is a smart idea for a lot of people because the saturated fat in the meat does tend to drive up LDL and in turn cardiovascular risk a little bit. And when choosing fish, I think having some oily fish each week, if you eat fish happily and you enjoy it, the best fish sauces, in my opinion, are probably the smash fish, which some people might have come across. So sardines, mackerel, anchovies, and salmon and herring because they're not that high up the food chain that they've bioaccumulated lots of toxins like mercury, but they're also very rich in preformed EPA and DHA, which your body is not very good at making from other fatty acids, including alpha linolenic acid, which is technically essential, but it's really the EPA and DHA that are particularly important. And then in terms of dairy, I think it depends on the person. I think a lot of people consuming full fat dairy is fine, but again, if you were trying to manage very high cholesterol levels, then choosing lower fat dairy sources is probably a good way to go. Occasionally, including some eggs too is, I think, very beneficial in large part because they're so nutrient dense and because of their choline content. And, obviously, I'm speaking about foods here that really overlap between the protein and fat categories. But in terms of specific added fats, I think including some nuts and seeds is almost always a very good idea. And I'm a fan of avocados and olives. For the most part, across whatever we're speaking about, I tend to favor whole food sources as opposed to oils or supplements when possible. But, obviously, oil is very practical, and they can be much cheaper for some people to access, so they certainly have their plates their place. And then in terms of carbohydrate sources, I think the the paleo people who used to be very anti grains in general were probably a bit misguided with that, and there's definitely a place for whole grains. I think all of the nutritional epidemiology shows that. I'm a particularly big fan of oats, the beta glucan fiber in them has some very interesting properties, but other whole grains, they're fine too, and then other pulses, they're great. Fruits and vegetables and fungi, they can all contribute as well. So just focusing primarily on minimally processed whole food sources, and the processing does matter. So if, for example, you were trying to manage your blood sugar better because you've just been told that you have prediabetes and you could be on the path to type two diabetes, then in general, the more heavily processed the carbohydrate, the higher the blood sugar spikes it's going to produce. A good example of this would be something like rice. So if you remove the outside of the rice, then it's gonna spike your blood sugar more consuming white rice versus brown rice. But also, if you think about other carbohydrate sources like dry fruit versus whole fruit, the whole fruit is going to be preferable not just for its effects on blood sugar, but also appetite control. So across those different categories, minimal processing tends to be a good thing, but there's plenty of flexibility within that. I'm sorry for the long answer, but, yeah, those are my high level thoughts. They might not seem that high level, but they're pretty high level. No. That was great. Seem, how do you how do you think about protein, fats, and carbohydrates? Are there particular protein sources or fats or carbohydrate sources that jump out at you as being especially generally beneficial? Yeah. I think I would apply the same hierarchy to protein, at least, that the most important thing is how much protein you eat. Because if you eat very high quality protein but not enough in enough quantities, then that's suboptimal than consuming an inferior type of protein in, sufficient quantities or above the sufficient quantities. And and yeah. Like, there are, you know, proteins that have more. I mean, honestly, it's higher digestibility, higher quality, so to say. But, I guess so many people get too caught up with, that that, higher quality. Therefore, that's the only thing I need to consume. Because based on that logic, we we should all be just taking protein powder. Because protein powder has much higher digestibility and much more amino acids than any other whole food, higher than steak and eggs, etcetera. So, the quantity of protein is the most important thing. As I said, 1.6 per kilogram appears to be, you know, it's generally considered like a maximal optimal intake. You can go above that, but it's not inherently necessary. If you are consuming lower quality of proteins that have fewer amino acids, like more plant proteins, then you probably need more protein in total to make up for the lower quality. So it's not that plants, you know, don't have amino acids. They have all the amino acids. Not all of the plant foods have all the amino acids. Right? But people eat a mixed diet anyway, so they're gonna get all the amino acids they need. It's just the quantity might be lower in plant foods. But if you eat a sufficient amount of those foods, then you're going to meet the required amino acids or the quantities that you, need. On a plant based diet, you might need more. I like to think that, okay, if you're eating a plant based plant based diet, then you'll need something like 30% more protein to have the same effect as if you were to eat a 100%, animal based, protein, intake. And interestingly, yeah, if you were on a animal based diet, then you're actually eating less protein than someone who is on a vegan diet because of the difference in quality. The higher the quality, the lower the protein demand. And the lower the quality of the protein, the more protein you need. And, yeah, you can get those foods on, on a plant based diet or get the quantities on a plant based diet, as well. What I like to think with protein is that, yeah, where it's packaged in is also quite relevant because you can get protein from, you know, chicken nuggets or or hot dogs or something like that. But, generally speaking, those foods tend to be more health harming, especially in large quantities. So they come with trans fats, other preservatives, other ingredients. It doesn't mean that you can't have them in very small amounts, but generally speaking, you wanna get your proteins from more whole food sources such as, you know, meat, eggs, fish, beans, legumes. And, personally, I think protein powders, although they're processed, I think they're healthy because, they don't just have garbage ingredients. You know, Of course, some protein powders have a lot of added sugars and bad ingredients, but generally speaking, protein powders are something that can be a part of a healthy diet. You add one scoop of protein powder per day, then that is generally health promoting. If all of your protein comes from protein powder, then you're probably not going to meet some micronutrients that you would get from, the actual whole food protein. But very ultra processed proteins, hot dogs, chicken nuggets, those kind of things, would you would want to avoid them. From the health perspective, it's quite interesting, you know, that historically, it's always seen that animal protein intake is associated with, you know, increased mortality, increased heart disease, etcetera, and plant proteins are associated with lower mortality. I do think that it's better to lean more towards, like plant proteins, from a, let's say, purely longevity health perspective. But a 100% plant protein intake probably isn't optimal, either just because in the real world, people aren't able to make up with their lack of quality or their lack of some other nutrients that you can't get from plant foods. Now if you were to be super meticulous about it, maybe you can pull it off. But let's say the average person probably doesn't have the skills or the knowledge to do so. So theoretically, it's possible probably, but, the average person isn't able to pull it off. And, there's there might be, like, some element with from a longevity perspective, I like to think that the amino acid balance might have some effect on longevity. So, specifically, the glycine and methionine, ratios, muscle meat is very high in methionine and much lower in glycine. And, in animal studies, a methionine excess is associated with shorter lifespan, and methionine restriction extends lifespan. So, if you eat more plant proteins, you're getting less methionine. So that might have some explanation that might explain partly why plant proteins are also associated with reduced mortality. But it's not only like the methionine that matters, it's the glycine as well. So it's not the excessive amount of methionine, it's more so the lack of, glycine to counterbalance that methionine. The more methionine you eat, the more glycine you also need, to balance the homocysteine and some something else that might affect the lifespan pathways. So if you eat more glycine, then maybe you can get away with a very high methionine diet, which in animal studies they have seen that glycine supplementation, even in the presence of high methionine intake, can extend lifespan or it doesn't shorten lifespan. So maybe if you just supplement a lot of glycine or supplement a lot of collagen or something like that, maybe it wouldn't have an effect on longevity. But I do think that very high methionine intake is, at least based on animal models, is driving aging or shortens lifespan, maximum lifespan at least. And plant proteins are just much lower in methionine. You use you would still need to supplement some glycine on a plant based diet because you're not getting that much glycine from plant foods either, but at least you're not getting excessive amounts of methionine. So I like a yeah, like a mixed protein intake, some beans, some meat, some fish, some eggs, and minimize that ultra processed proteins like processed meats, ham, sausages, chicken nuggets, and those kind of things. With fats, you know, the worst fats out there are trans fats. I think pretty much everyone agrees about that. For fats, I think, the most important thing is, the quantities. Again, how much fats are you eating? Are you gaining weight from that excess fat intake, and how it affects your lipids and the blood work? Because people respond very differently to dietary cholesterol and dietary saturated fat. Some people have very high cholesterol and APO B levels from, even small amounts of saturated fat, whereas others don't. So it's very individual based. So, you know, the epidemiological studies, which suggest that higher saturated fat intake might increase the risk of heart disease. But, you know, what's the causal link there? It's the ApoB. And if your ApoB is low while eating a lot of saturated fat, I don't think that it, you know, necessarily will result in heart disease. So the tracking the blood work for for for fat intake, I think, is, very crucial because people respond very differently to different fats due to genetics. But I do think that, getting most of your fats from whole foods is smarter rather than adding a ton of butter or even a ton of olive oil. So olive oil is I would consider, a healthy oil, but, I wouldn't add, like, something five tablespoons or 10 tablespoons a day of olive oil to your diet. You would generally want to get your fats from, the whole foods, meats, fish, eggs, nuts, and seeds, avocado, olives. Like, the whole olives are better as well. And I wouldn't really, you know, add a lot of other types of added fats to your diet, mostly because of the calorie intake. Most people don't need a ton of extra calories, so it's just easier to reduce their calorie intake by cutting out on a ton of, extra fats. And carbohydrates, you know, the more processed the carbohydrate, then, yeah, the the worst quality it tends to be. So, simple sugars, liquid sugars, refined grains, so more pastries and, those kind of things are are the worst typically, and, vegetables, fruits, berries. I also agree that whole grains are pretty good, You know, buckwheat, quinoa, sorghum, oats, etcetera, they're a bit over vilified, I think, in, the, nutrition space. So, you know, oats, they contain a lot of different nutrients, and some of those anti nutrients like phytic acids actually have anti cancer properties. So I don't think they're that bad from that scenario. Of course, someone has some food sensitivities towards oats or tomatoes even, or whatever their food may be. Yes. For that particular individual, this food isn't suitable, but I don't have any food sensitivities. I can eat tomatoes. I can eat cucumber. I can eat grains, etcetera. So why should I restrict it? Because it doesn't have any negative effect on my health and there's no, I guess, physiological reason to do so either, especially if you look at the research about different polyphenols and carotenoids on health. Lycopene in tomatoes, it appears to be associated with reduced prostate cancer risk and these phytic acid in boats also appear to reduce the risk of cancer. So, you know, all the evidence would point that for, like, generally speaking, they're health promoting, but for specific individuals with food sensitivities or allergies, they tend to cause more harm. So it's always depends on the individual what they should eat at the end of the day. Yeah. That was great. I think, I think your point about consuming the food forms of fat is especially important, just because we think of fats like olive oil and whatnot, which are generally healthy or at the very least neutral. But if you are consuming large amounts of them, of course, it's gonna have negative effect on on your health. If you're if you're over consuming in the context of over consuming in your entire diet. Yeah, it's those are, those those are definitely good guiding principles. I think, you know, some some of the takeaways. I think that one aspect which we're about to get into, more on protein is that we've been centered a lot more. Simi, you mentioned, more on the longevity aspect, but it seems like a lot of the the conversation around protein seems to be centered around muscle mass and function and whatnot. And I think that the, there are different ways of thinking about protein. So I think going into protein consumption, again, I guess it goes back to that conversation of, do you wanna be in the top 1% of longevity? Do you wanna be in really good athletics, or do you wanna be general well-being? Typically, a higher protein intake will, lead to to benefits. However, if we can steer this conversation towards that top 1% in longevity, there has been quite a debate, we'll say, on the protein, front, which seem you you alluded to it talking about methionine, talking about glycine and the relationship there and why methionine may be tracking with, with lower longevity. So to set this up, there are some longevity researchers that claim that a lower protein diet is better, and then there are protein researchers that claim that a higher protein diet is better. So I'm gonna throw this, to Greg first just because in our last podcast, you had alluded to the fact that you had quite some thoughts on this. I'd be especially interested, and then I'd love to hear from Seem as well. How do you think about that? How do you tease out the differences in the recommendations or how researchers are talking about protein? I think quite a lot of it relates to the types of studies that people are doing. So whether they're doing mechanistic studies to try and understand specific molecular pathways, typically in non human animals or in cells versus people who are looking at epidemiology versus people who understand those things, but are doing experimental interventions with people to try and understand protein metabolism. And it seems that if you split people according to which of those camps they're in, you could probably predict what their thoughts are in relation to what the best protein intake for longevity is. Protein is really important, and I favor higher protein intakes for a few reasons, which I've glossed over previously. One of those obviously is its effects on fat free mass on skeletal muscle, but also on bone tissue too. Frailty is really important as people get older Because if someone falls, maybe because they don't have sufficient explosive strength in their knee extensors and their hip extensors and their plantar flexors. And then because they've got brittle bones, maybe they've got osteopenia or osteoporosis, they end up breaking a bone, which would often be the hip. Then they might, they might end up in a hospital bed being inactive, and then the disuse, not just the their muscular and skeletal system, but all of their bodily systems will precipitate quite a rapid decline. So they end up in this vicious cycle of frailty and life expectancy after a hip fracture. Once you're past a certain age, is not very long at all. So we need to avoid that. And therefore, by providing building blocks to remodel skeletal muscle, but also protein contributes to bone metabolism, protein is important. Obviously, you need to stimulate that remodeling, and the way you do that is through appropriate resistance training. So it's important in that context and protein quality feeds into that as as does protein quantity, but it's also instrumental to appetite control. So looking across the different macronutrients, per gram, protein tends to be the most satiating, more so than carbohydrate or fat. We'll put alcohol to the side. It's a slightly confusing one. And therefore, if we think about the fact that we live in an obesogenic environment where people are disposed to overeating, we've spoken so much about energy intake today. If by increasing your protein intake, you end up consuming fewer calories than you otherwise would have, That probably is a good thing if you think about the population at large. So those effects on appetite control matter too. And then protein also stimulates the production of some hormones that ultimately help to reduce blood sugar spikes in response to meals. And it slows gastric emptying too, so different constituents in your digestive system pass more slowly through the tract and therefore glucose is going to appear in your blood at a lower rate. So it's also helpful for metabolic control, certainly glycemic control, probably lipoemic control too. So in those ways, protein matters. There's also the fact that many protein rich foods are very nutrient dense in general, but they're not necessarily the foods that a lot of people end up consuming. The most nutrient dense animal source proteins include things like awful, so liver and hearts, and most people are not particularly interested in consuming those on a regular basis. But for that reason, dietary variety matters and eating nose to tail has some advantages, which relate in part to what Siim was saying about the different amino acids that you find in those different tissues, but also various different micronutrients. People speak about liver as being nature's multivitamin. So the protein source is really important to general nutrition, much the same way that people encourage people to consume a rainbow of different plant colors, which is good dietary advice, but we want dietary variety across everything that we're consuming. And part of the issue with the epidemiology is that if there's a signal between higher protein intakes and some sort of adverse health outcome, then it can't be a red herring. It's due to residual confounding because the question is what is driving the higher protein intake? And sometimes additional protein is coming from heavily processed foods that are rich in saturated fat and flour and various other additives that might not be good for you. And so I have a reservation whenever I see studies about red meat intake, for example, because there's a massive difference between consuming 150 grams of beef liver and consuming 150 grams of a very fatty, very processed beef sausage. They're not equivalent. And we need to be able to lump things together to make life easier, but we have to bear in mind some of those nuances when looking at that type of epidemiology. So protein source in that way is really important. And then in terms of the mechanisms, I think what's missed here is people will tend to focus on the enter pathway. We've got this biochemical pathway that's really important, anabolic processes in cells, building new structures. And that is, of course, key to healthy growth and development, but it can go awry during aging. But we have to think about it in the context of specific tissues and also in terms of turning it on and off. And so there's this assumption that if increased signaling through mTOR seems to largely be proaging in model organisms, like mice and flies and so on, then we want to reduce protein because protein stimulates activity in the mTOR complex one pathway. But there are a couple of big issues with that. One is that we need to carry on that type of signaling in skeletal muscle, especially as we get older because there can be anabolic resistance in that muscle. So the muscles are less able to knit together new proteins in response to dietary protein, which is largely driven by inactivity rather than anything about aging per se. So because of that, older people benefit from higher protein intakes than their younger counterparts, everything else counted for. And what makes it extra hard is that a lot of older people really struggle to have an adequate appetite. And because protein is very satiating, they therefore, if anything, sometimes end up consuming less protein when they need more. So that complicates things a bit. But just thinking about the whole swathe of adults out there, if protein is satiating, then when people consume higher protein diets, they're gonna eat less in total. Less in total means lower energy availability, which in my mind, if calories are a big driver of signaling through those growth promoting path pathways, not just mTOR, but insulin IGF one and others, then that reduction in energy balance is going to reduce some of that signaling. And if we're doing activity and we're consuming plenty of protein, then we're still driving that activity in skeletal muscle and bone where we need it. So it doesn't make any sense. And what's happened is you've had scientists like Valter Longo and others, and he published a frankly laughable paper in one of the cell press journals about a decade ago, where he did this interesting, really nuanced technical work on my Sephiracal correctly, looking at some effects of protein on pathways that are implicated in chronic disease. And then he tried to back that up with a bizarre analysis of a cohort and massaged the data such that it suggested that higher protein intakes were associated with an increased risk of this specific disease that he was looking at. And then in response to that, the protein metabolism researchers who really know their stuff, so people like Stew Phillips, wrote a rebuttal pointing out all the issues with it. But that type of rift between those different camps has continued over the years. So to summarize, I think a lot of people benefit from higher protein intakes. I think where the protein is coming from is really important. I think consuming a diversity of different proteins is a good way to go. And I think a lot of the low protein advocates aren't thinking about what determines longevity in people as opposed to in rats. One of the other things I didn't mention is that protein is important for immune function. If you've got mice that are raised in specific pathogen free cages where they're not exposed to novel pathogens and therefore mean function is not a particularly big determinant of their longevity. And these are small animals. They don't have far to fall. If a mice rolls over onto its side or topples over, it's probably not gonna break its hip. And their food is controlled, so we can do away with that particular variable. Whereas in humans, if you can see more protein, you're eating less. And you compare that to the human condition where we're bombarded with novel pathogens all the time, which influence risk of lots of different things, not just the specific infectious disease that's associated with the exposure, so like COVID and SARS. COVID also seems to dispose people to Alzheimer's and various other issues too. And then when we fall, we fall really hard. So you put that together and the research doesn't translate. So much preclinical research doesn't translate, and I think protein is a really good case in point. So I feel like I've been sat happily on my soapbox for a while. And I don't mean to disparage Longo and pick him out as the worst purveyor of this because he's done some really good research and he does these amazingly intricate experiments that are really impressive and really interesting mechanistically, but it it just exemplifies, like, a limitation of that type of research that frustrates me. And I'm happy that some people who really, really know their protein well are now given large platforms. As is often the case with podcasts, people tend to just come back to the same three people. So if you listen to protein researchers, then it's often Luke Van Loon or Streemagill or Jorn Promelan or someone like that. And there are loads of great protein scientists that are out there. Like I mentioned for that earlier, like him and Mike Granny at the University of Nottingham, they've done amazing research over the years. Like, you know, if you list many more people and some of those people, they never get any limelight, but they really, really know their stuff. These other people, they know their stuff about other things, but they're coming at this tangentially, which is helpful in terms of ideation, but it sometimes means that they completely miss the big picture. That's, yeah. It's incredible. I I think, probably some of my follow-up questions would probably be better off podcast simply because, they're gonna get a lot they're gonna get very technical, but I'd be really interested in your take on some of these, Longo studies because I I've just started delving into them, and especially considering your knowledge about some what some of the other researchers, some of the other protein metabolism researchers have put out there. I'd really like to to pick your brain on on some of that, but I'll leave that for, for another time simply because, again, it's just gonna get too technical. I think, I can I can see the YouTube comments already? Some people will be like, oh, that was amazing. And then some the vast majority would be like, how do I use this? So so I'll leave it, but that that was that was absolutely fascinating to listen to, so I really appreciate it. The the one question I have before we we go to Seam's perspective on this is when it comes to epidemiological research, because you're mentioning residual confounding. And again, I don't wanna get too technical with this. But, don't you think that, especially considering we've got so many studies in different cohorts or at least my understanding is that we've got different cohorts on this stuff that and different, research groups that have that have probed this question, don't you think that a lot of that stuff, some of the obvious ones have been accounted for, like saturated fat or heme or, some of these other other factors that would track with, protein intake? And we still, as far as I understand, and correct me if I'm wrong because again, I haven't done a deep dive into this yet, we still see this, these these links between, increased mortality with really high protein intakes compared to, lower protein intakes. What's your take on that? Doctor Well, I haven't spent that much time looking at that body of research for a while, if I'm being frank, because I tend to focus on certain types of research. And there are some of these questions that just get cycled over again and again and again, over the years, something comes into favor and then it goes back out of favor and then it comes back again. So So that one of the things that you mentioned is the whole seed oil debate at the moment, which is something that was widely discussed about fifteen years ago when the paleo diet was at its most popular. And so honestly, I think that my thoughts about that are relatively established, and I now have the knowledge that I need to have to be able to move on, and it just doesn't feel like the best use of my attention resources. So I can't comment too much about specific studies. If that is the case and there is that type of consistency between studies, then that's interesting. But I think nutritional epidemiology in general and I I don't mean to seem like I'm now cherry picking, but just as a broad comment about nutritional epidemiology, in many instances, it's incredibly noisy. And obviously, John Ioannidis and others have written about this over the years. And there are some people who basically say that we should just throw it all under the bus. And I wouldn't go that far because I think that if you take the example of biomarkers of dietary intakes, there are some biomarkers that correspond very well to how people are actually eating. And the dietary assessment methods that we use are also getting better over time. We're not just relying on food frequency questions, which had some advantages or twenty four hour dietary recalls using traditional interviewer style administration. But there are certainly limitations to that. And I think also there's, so going back to those camps, I think there are people who who want to see certain results and therefore will go about their data analysis in certain ways. You can start to work out if that's the case by looking at various different things, but it's it's always interesting to see someone who, ahead of publishing the original research, has published some sort of protocol. Like, there's the journal trials where people publish what they're going to do, and then they stick to it, which is great because it keeps them honest that it stops them from p hacking and trying to look through the data in different ways, try and tease out associations, which then facilitates publication because it's hard to publish negative results, by which I mean, null results. So finding that there was no relationship between two things. So I think some of it probably does relate to that, but otherwise foods are really complicated. They interact with each other, the food matrices and so on matter too. And so I think looking to some of the intervention trials can tell us quite a lot. When we do that with dietary protein, and admittedly, a lot of those trials are on protein powders and things, but like take the example of whey protein supplementation, It's meta analyzed for its effects on all sorts of things, including changes in at free mass and change in blood lipids and so on. And across the board, it looks good. So I think a lot of it, if there is a relationship there, it's driven by what I was saying about the sources of protein being foods that aren't particularly healthy, what we would have called junk foods previously, which nowadays would be given the euphemistic label ultra processed foods. So it is probably a slightly inadequate answer, but I think that that stuff does contribute. Yeah. I got you. Yeah. We could definitely go on discussing a lot of the research on that. I I do wanna get into a lot more depth on that in general. But, Seem, what what are your, what's your perspective on the longevity versus kind of how the the I mean, even Greg just now mentioned it. Right? Some of the protein research that shows direct intervention trials saying, hey, you consume protein, you get better fat free mass, you get reduced, body weight, body fat. You tend to see improved serum lipids and whatnot. So how do you reconcile that or don't you? Doctor. Yeah. Well, with all research, it's important to, you know, first of all, not look at a single study and, also not look at just one line of evidence. So, if you just look at observational studies, then you can draw certain conclusions about protein intake and longevity. And generally, it's gonna be that higher protein diets are associated with reduced mortality, maybe with the exception of elderly people, where you tend to see the flip of that to that lower protein diets are actually associated with higher mortality in elderly people because of the reasons that Greg said about hip fractures and, those things. And if you look at just animal research, then, yeah, you can also see that, high high protein diets are worse and low protein diets are better. But that's, you know, these animals live in cases and they're not in the free world where they can break a hip, etcetera. So there's a lot of, you know, things you need to consider when you're just looking at one line of evidence and you need to look at, you know, multiple lines of evidence. You know, there's the mechanistic studies about mTOR and, methionine and those things. There's animal studies. There's observational studies. There's, randomness controlled trials as well that obviously can't look at longevity, but that they can look at certain aspects of health, like fat mass and the blood sugar and those things. So, there's obviously no perfect answer to anything in nutrition and exercise as well when it comes to long term health outcomes and longevity. There's a certain, trends you can, look at. And if multiple lines of evidence point in a certain direction, then you can, at least, you know, I guess, lean towards a certain opinion. You can't make some definite conclusions, but you can lean towards some certain, trends a little bit. So what my opinion is about protein and longevity is that I think people should eat enough protein, and there's no need to eat more protein because it, you know, potentially could be harmful, especially when you're talking about maximal lifespan. So I don't think anyone needs to eat more than one gram per pound of body weight of protein per day. You know, some bodybuilders, they eat 1.5 grams per pound, two grams per pound, or something like that. I think it's completely unnecessary, first of all, for muscle growth or body composition purposes and, you know, potentially could be harmful. I don't think it necessarily is in the short term, especially. But over the course of decades, we don't know what would be if someone eats, eats 300 grams of protein every day for fifty years. So what would be enough protein? I think this 1.6 grams per kilogram is more than enough because it maximizes muscle growth, body composition outcomes, and you still will even build muscle with a lower protein intake than that. Something like 1.2 to 1.6 per kilogram, I think, is, the sweet spot for protein for, muscle growth perspective muscle muscle growth purposes. And you need certain amount of muscle for longevity because if you're sarcopenic and low muscle and low bone density, then, yeah, your risk of breaking hip, falling off the stairs or something something like that is much higher in elderly years. Now older people, I think, do need slightly more, perhaps maybe 20% more or something like that. But, here, I think the meal frequency appears to be more important because, like Rick said earlier, there's this refractory period or certain maximal thresholds that you can stimulate protein synthesis with each meal for a certain period of time. So even if we eat 300 grams of protein in one meal, it's not the same as dividing it into four meals across the entire day. So if someone needs to maintain more muscle to avoid sarcopenia, they probably need to spread it out more. So an elderly person, they shouldn't do one meal a day. They should you know, have, I think, four protein meals per day of at least 30 to 50 grams of protein per meal, depending on their body weight. But for a younger person, they can eat much larger amounts of protein and in less meals. So the Jon Trommelan's, research two years ago now show that your body can absorb a 100 grams of protein in one meal, and it actually maintained a higher anabolic state for a longer period of time as well compared to 25 grams of protein. So, you don't necessarily need to micromanage the frequency if you're a younger person, but if you're older, then you do need to ensure at least, you know, three, four protein meals, per day. Now low protein diets for a younger individual probably are safe in the short term because younger individuals tend to have a higher amounts of muscle mass than elderly people. And especially if you're doing resistance training, even on a low protein diet, you can still, I guess, maintain some of that, the muscle mass as well, much more easily. But I do think the elderly person needs more protein. So so let's say 1.7, 1.8 grams per kilogram, maybe two grams per kilogram, but, no one needs, you know, 300 grams of protein per day. So I do think that, you know, first of all, it's unnecessary to be eating a ton of protein. And secondly, if you wanna do some sort of, let's say, precautionary principle, then, you wanna lean towards a moderate amount of protein. I don't think a very high protein diet is inherently harmful, but, you know, why why take the risk if it's not physiologically required, you know, even for muscle growth? So the protein intake for muscle growth is higher than you need for muscle maintenance. You can maintain muscle on a pretty low protein diet. For elderly people, it's not optimal, but for younger individuals, it is manageable. If someone has low bone density already in their youth or if they do a DEXA scan in their forties, they see that they have low bone density, low muscle mass. You know, it's gonna be harder to build it later in life, so you need to catch up. You need to maybe increase your protein intake a lot and make sure you lift weights, etcetera, to increase your bone density and muscle mass so that you wouldn't be frail when you're 80 years old. But, I guess, yeah, there's a lot of talk about the importance of protein, but I also think that a lot of it is overhyped, that you don't need insane amounts of protein. I think the one gram per pound is already more than enough. You don't need that much. The research shows that 1.6 grams or kilogram already maximizes, generally speaking, the muscle hypertrophy. And if you eat less than that, then that's actually also enough to maintain at least muscle and build it slightly. You're not completely optimizing muscle hypertrophy with a 1.2 gram per kilogram protein intake, but you can easily do it. Interestingly, I I did in my own experiment. I, you know, a few years ago, I was eating one gram per pound, which is 2.2 grams per kilogram of protein. I've reduced it to 1.6. So I dropped my protein intake by about 25%. I didn't lose muscle based on my DEXA scan. I actually increased my appendicular lean mass index by something like 200 grams, within the span of from, from my first DEXA scan in 2023 and the last one, this January. So, like, within the span of one point five years, I actually gained 200 gram, 200 grams of lean tissue in my arms and legs by reducing my protein intake by 25%. Now it's still a high protein intake compared to the standards. The standard diet, 1.6 grams per kilogram is much higher than the average person eats, but it's lower than what a lot of, I guess, bodybuilders or protein researchers recommend, the one gram per pound of body weight. Doctor I'm assuming that with that experiment, you were continuing to make progress in the gym too. Doctor Yeah. So I increased my volume in the gym. So I reduced the weight because, you know, I was in a, actually, slightly calorie deficit, but I increased the volume. So I was doing I was doing, slightly lower weights, maybe 10% lower weights, but I was doing three, three, four more reps per set. So my total volume increased. So their biggest contributor is obviously resistance training. If you eat 300 grams of protein per day, but you're not lifting weights, then your lean muscle mass will be probably higher than someone who eats low protein and doesn't lift weights, but it's not gonna be higher than someone who eats low protein and lifts weights, in my opinion. And, you know, looking back at the mechanisms, eating a ton of protein, but not lifting weights probably drives cancer more than if you were to be lifting weights. So the mTOR pathway, you can activate mTOR in different organs. You don't wanna activate mTOR you know, your liver or certain other tissues, but you wanna activate mTORs in your muscles. You know, you need mTOR in the brain as well for brain cell, neurogenesis, but you mostly wanna activate mTOR in the muscle cells to, help with the muscle growth. So the signal for that is resistance training. If you don't lift weights, then, you activate inventory in the wrong places, in my opinion. And that might not be the most optimal. This, this conversation, I think, is just it's a it's a single question that could suck up hours and hours of time simply because, like, Simi, you just touched on so many different aspects, so many different contexts. Right? If you're lifting weights, if you're not lifting weights, if you're overweight, if you're not overweight, if you're, over the age of, let's say, 60, if you're frail, if there's, life circumstances, if you're dealing with cancer, if you're dealing with, other disease states like diabetes, there's there's so many different circumstances that we have to take into account. And I do think my perspective is that the protein requirements and the protein recommendations are going to shift based off of and will shift pretty wildly actually based off of individual circumstance that I don't necessarily think I would say with some of the other macronutrients. Like, for example, carbohydrates, I think for the most like, if I were to focus on fiber, let's say, I think by and large, and correct me if I'm wrong, we'd probably say generally more fiber is better. I mean, up to a point, obviously, you're gonna you're gonna start feeling pretty uncomfortable once you get to a 100 grams of fiber or whatever it might be. But, the so if if you have cancer, if you're older, if you're, you know, all these things, the general take is, okay, increase your fiber no matter what, and then you can start playing around with some of these other other factors. But for protein, I'm not I'm really not convinced that, just aiming for higher protein is is always better. I'm still I think I'm still at the infancy of trying to really reconcile that because all the all the protein research that I've looked at has been in relation to to exercise performance, body weight, body fat, all that stuff. And in in those contexts, yeah, higher protein diet tends to be beneficial. But as you get into the longevity space, I, again, I'm still at the infancy of trying to understand that, but it seems to me like there may be some contradictory information or data out there, which to Greg Greg's point about, some of Longo's doctor Valto Longo who's who's a for anybody who's not aware, is a is a researcher that's done a lot of work on longevity, basically, and has delved into a little bit on this, this protein front and seems to to believe that lower protein and and pretty sizably lower protein diet is, is more beneficial for longevity. I I still need to to look into that research a lot more, but there is more and more research from my perspective. I don't know if you guys saw a recent study that came out maybe three weeks ago, a month ago, looking at, low protein diets and the effect that it had on longevity in mice. And then they there's another study that's been done in humans that parallels a lot of the same results. So increases in metabolism, reductions in body fat, increases in lean mass, like, things like that were paralleled between the human cohort as well as the, the the mouse study. And while I certainly wouldn't jump to any conclusions based off that research, I think that there there may be something there that we still need to to investigate. But the overall point being that, there's just so much context that needs to be applied to a to a person's individual circumstance. And I think for the average person, I think a higher protein diet tends to be, beneficial across the board. Doctor. Yeah. So I think it's important to, I guess, define as well, what is high protein and low protein For for the government organizations, a high protein diet is, I think, already something that is above 17% of total calories. So that's, you know, we would consider it low protein still. I, I, I think a high protein diet is yet anything above 1.6 grams per kilogram and up to 2.2 grams per kilogram, like what the bodybuilders eat. I think that's a high protein diet, but compared to what the average person eats, I'm also eating a high protein diet, although I'm eating a 130 grams of protein, a 120, a 130 grams of protein per day. Compared to the bodybuilders, I'm eating a, you know, maybe moderate protein diet, but compared to the general population, I'm eating a high protein diet. So, yes, the general population generally needs to increase their protein that, maybe they might eat, let's say I'm just zooming out numbers, but I would I would imagine the average person needs something like one gram per kilogram at the most. So they would probably need to increase the protein by 30 to 50% for and they would see health improvements because they'll eat also other things less. They'll eat less junk and, less calories overall. But, yeah, someone who's health conscious, they're probably eating already enough protein that they don't need to necessarily add a ton of extra. I think I I don't wanna dwell on this one too much longer, but I just wanna throw in a few other thoughts just to tick some boxes to have it ticked. Yeah. One of them is that the irony of all this stuff is that protein tends to come along for the ride with energy intake in total. And so a lot of people who are most fussed about their protein intakes don't have to care about it because they're consuming lots of calories anyway. And that's typically true of the gym rats because the more total calories you consume, the more your protein is gonna climb. So many people who need to worry about this stuff are the people who don't think twice about it. And the people who worry most about it, they shouldn't care less. And then obviously energy availability interacts with your protein needs. So team spoke about how he was building muscle on a lower protein diet. If everything else had been held constant, then I would expect the reduction in protein intake slightly negatively affects muscle protein balance. But if total energy intake is going up, then protein matters a little bit less. More of it can be partitioned towards skeletal muscle as opposed to being used for other I was I was in a I was still in a calorie deficit. I was losing the body fat as well. My my visceral fat and stuff went down. Yeah. My so The the the general point remains. And then in terms of factors that modify your protein needs, so energy availability is one of those, as I was just saying. Another is age because of that anabolic resistance that I mentioned earlier. So in general, older people would probably benefit from slightly higher intakes, but some of that is just because of physical activity, because people become less physically active, and then protein quality as we spoke about earlier. So based on all of that, there's a range of intakes that are going to be available. They're going to be appropriate for people. And from my perspective, the range of intakes that I would recommend to people that don't have any medical conditions that would contra indicate higher protein diets could be anywhere from about 1.2 to about 2.8 grams per kilo. 2.8 grams per kilo of beef, a vegan bodybuilder deep into contest prep with low energy availability, doing lots of exercise, who's a little bit older. So everything is stacked in favor of higher protein intakes. Whereas I think for the general population, probably something around 1.4 gram grams per kilo is gonna work really well. And there are other factors to consider too, like planetary boundaries and stuff, which are important for the world at large. So, yeah, I just wanted to chime in with those closing thoughts because I realized that I hadn't mentioned anything about protein intakes and what I thought might be an appropriate range for people. So quite a big range, but most people, they do well at the lower end of that range. And reference nutrient intakes tend to be about 0.8 grams per kilo. And I think expressing intakes in this instance relative to body mass is much more helpful in speaking about sensitive calories. It's it's so much more informative. So with protein, I would certainly always do that. With carbohydrate, I think for athletes, it's helpful to do that too. But I'll pause there because we've probably spoken about protein for about an hour now. Yeah. It has been a while. But your guys' ranges that you're mentioning is exactly my point that there's it's so context driven. So, yeah, we'll leave it there, but, there's there's there's definitely plenty more to to say on the topic. So we don't have too too much more time. So I'd like to discuss just one more thing, and then we'll get to kind of the final thoughts and final points. So I'm gonna merge two questions into one because they're tightly linked with one another. I don't know. Sim, you probably have a lot more experience with this, but maybe, Greg, you do too on on social media that you have this it's almost like this quasi war between, low carb community and the plant based community. And it it seems like both sides are kind of at odds with one another, and certainly there's some crossover as well. But generally, there's this kind of back and forth. And my question to you is that how do we reconcile the fact that, and maybe you feel slightly differently about this, but I'll ask it this way anyway. How do you reconcile the fact that low carb diets across a multitude of studies can show improvements in diabetes. So diabetes remission, improvements in seizures, significant fat loss, and other health outcomes end up, better. But and yet, we still see a lot of plant based diets at least, and maybe this goes back to to some of Greg's critiques in epidemiological research, but also in clinical trials indicating that plant based diets tend to come out on top in terms of lifespan and health span. So first of all, do you guys agree with that? And secondly, if you do or if you don't, I'd be curious on how you reconcile that. How do you how do you think about that? Seem, do you wanna do you wanna take a stab at this first? Yeah. Well, I think, you know, in epidemiological studies, it's mostly because, I guess you can find a correlation between plant based foods and the higher diet quality, that the overall diet is higher quality, generally speaking, if you eat a lot of plants. And of course, you know, you can try to confound for these variables, but it's not gonna be perfect. So I do think that eating more, getting a lot of calories from plants is probably more beneficial for most people. But it doesn't mean that it needs to be 100% plant based or something like that. So it's obviously an unanswered question that we don't have an answer to that because there's never been, this clinical trial that's done, this investigation for, long enough of a period of time. But I do generally think that eating more plants and fiber results in better diet quality. And if you have better diet quality, you tend to be in better health and a better body composition over the long term as well. When it comes to these short term trials, then low carb diets are better in weight loss and blood sugar management in the short term. But if you span it out over the course of a year or two years, then they tend to equal out. So low carb diets result in much faster weight loss, mostly because of the water weight loss that happens, if you, have lower levels of incidence or you lose more water. But over the long term, there doesn't appear to be that much of a big difference when it comes to weight loss and, blood sugar, management. Now someone should should should someone follow a low carb diet to improve their blood sugar or help with weight loss, you know, I think depends on the person. I think some people find it more suitable or easier to adhere to, but others might not. So, personally, I actually do better on a, you know, higher carb diet. Obviously, I don't have diabetes or obesity, but, you know, it depends a lot on the person, what diet diet they prefer, but I guess the important aspect is the. In the metabolic work studies where all the foods and calories are controlled for there's no difference in, in weight loss because, the people are fed. They're put in this lab and they're fed everything in the exact same quantities, etcetera. So there's so high carb intake isn't an inhibiting factor for weight loss in these, controlled studies, which means that in the real world, people who are doing low carb diets, they just feel more satiated or they end up eating fewer calories. It doesn't matter. It doesn't mean that calories don't matter or that that that carbohydrates are somehow bad, that they prevent you from losing weight. It's just that in the real world, the same with intermittent fasting, in uncontrolled studies, people who do intermittent fasting tend to lose more weight. But in these actually randomized controlled trials, there's no difference between regular calorie restriction and intermittent fasting for weight loss. In the real world, people might find a low carb diet or intermittent fasting easier to adhere to. So that's why they end up eating less due to satiety or or something else. And, yeah, from these short term studies, these clinical trials, even two year clinical trials, we're not gonna be able to say what is gonna be the outcome in decades Because, you know, things like heart disease, Alzheimer's, they take decades to progress. So even if someone, you know, might be losing weight initially within the span of even two years, we don't know what is going to be the final outcome in fifty years, sixty years. So that's why there's going to be still a lot of unanswered questions in that area. So I think for most people, the biggest, let's say short term goal would be to achieve normal body weight and achieve normal metabolic health and then try to adopt the more balanced diet over the long term, which would be, I guess, again, from a precautionary principle, smarter to, to have a slightly more balanced than that. Yeah. Great. Okay. Greg, you want to chime in? Sure. Yeah. Just on what's you mentioned at the end, I think people need to bear in mind the more restrictive their diet is in terms of diet composition, the more at risk they are of both nutrient deficiencies and nutrient excesses too. And so variety is good. And unless you're using nutrition to try and therapeutically manage a health condition, I think relatively mixed approach is gonna work well for a lot of people. I'll point out a few things. One is that the division between those two different camps is interesting because you can, of course, be on a low carb diet and be on a vegan diet at the same time. And I say vegan because I'm slightly allergic to the term plant based. I know it's so used nowadays, but what was wrong with vegan? Like, what do we mean by plant based? Vegan and vegetarian, they have very specific connotations. I guess that it was in part a response to some of the negative connotations that came with those particular labels, but I've always found it slightly vague and pointless as a term. That's widely used nowadays, so I'll move on from that. In terms of what you mentioned, Nick, I largely agree. And I think some of that reflects what I was speaking about earlier in discussing protein. And by that, I mean that there is gonna be some healthy user bias with some of those studies that's not accounted for in statistical analysis. People who consume more plants, probably more interested in health in general, probably a bit more physically active and so on. Some of that is a little bit difficult to account for in that type of research. And then we've got the sources and so on that contribute to that too. But we need to bear in mind that those studies showing beneficial effects are in the context of trying to manage a health condition typically, whether it's just someone having too much body fat or being dyslipidemic and using a low carb diet to, say, drive down their triglycerides, whatever it might be. And you can formulate a healthy low carbohydrate diet, which would be perfectly conducive to living a long time. If your fat sources are predominantly coming from plants. So avocados and nuts and seeds and so on, as we mentioned earlier, And your diet isn't heavily processed and you've got good diet variety, diet timing is appropriate, adequate protein, and so on, that's a perfectly healthy dietary pattern. And so I think we have to come back to some of the best experimental studies that have been done to help inform us about what might be an appropriate path. And the study that comes to mind, which I'm sure you guys have both read is Chris Gardner's old diet fit study, where for twelve months, people who are overweight or obese were randomized to either a healthy low carb or a healthy low fat diet. And they're both weight loss diets. And at the end of the twelve months, the weight loss was almost precisely the same in the two groups. And their general health looked very similar too. And they also looked at some single nucleotide polymorphisms to try and work out whether people might be better used to one type of diet than the other and so on. There have been some reanalysis since then to try and work out if that is the case. And maybe we'll find out over time that we can make personalized recommendations based on certain biomarkers identifying who is best suited to that diet and who's best suited to that diet. But the general point is that they can both be healthy and so a lot of this stuff does come down to personal preferences. We can be a bit more targeted with how we manipulate those variables to nudge things in the right direction, but you just have to bear in mind what is sustainable for someone. What can they stick to? Compliance is really important. And with the epidemiology, I think we always need to take it with a pinch of salt, not too much salt because sodium will push up your blood pressure, but just with a pinch of salt. I think, I think another aspect so both I completely agree with both of you guys. I think one other aspect is that, there seems to be this almost contradictory mentality that comes with a lot of this tribalism in certain nutrition camps. It's it's almost like, we we've created these identities for for both groups when exactly to you guys both talked about it that it it can be married. Like, you can be a low carb and be, to use Greg's favorite term, plant based. You can do both. So they don't have to be either or, but it seems more that the disagreement comes from, well, I've chosen my side, so therefore I will defend it to to to all ends, as opposed to to actually focusing on some of the the scientific literature that shows that both can work. Sorry to interrupt me, Nick. I just think you've you've got to bear in mind in that instance too, that what what does sometimes happen is that there's a vested interest. It's not necessarily there at the start the whole time, but maybe someone takes a stance. Let's say that it's a low carb stance and. They don't necessarily even plan to make relevant products in the future, but then two years later, there's an opportunity and they start making some sort of low carb lifestyle product. And then that causes them to dig their heels and more. And going back to Volta Longo, I wonder if that's happened with him a little bit where he's now got his fasting mimicking low protein prolonged diet where he sells these very expensive, very low calorie items for people to consume for a few days every once in a few months, and low protein is a big part of that approach. And then that reinforces the stance because now there are other things on the line too. I'm not saying that that's happened with him, but it is a relevant example. So I think it's helpful to sometimes look at the different ties that people have. And I always appreciate it when you find people who superficially, you might expect to have certain ties. Maybe the research has been funded by a certain industry, or maybe they've helped produce a particular product, but then they change their stance. They say, well, I was wrong about that stuff. Sodium obviously does increase blood pressure. Potassium does lower blood pressure. That stuff does matter. And it's it's always entertaining seeing the evolution of some influences and how they modify things over time. And then suddenly this is permissible in their world. Whereas two years ago is absolutely not an option. Right. Yeah, definitely. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's very political. Like you can, predict someone's political views based on what's their handle. Is it like a carnivore handle or a vegan handle? You can pretty much 90% be accurate what their political leaning is as well. It's a carnivore's name right. Well, I don't know a lot of, left wing carnivores. I don't know any, but Yeah. I mean, so it's it's just yeah. It's just the issue that it's it's not only a nutrition debate. It's a political debate as well that people have. Yeah. And, I guess that in a lot of ways makes it a very more confrontational and, you know, identity is involved here as well. If your if your handle is yet you start off you start your Instagram with whatever handle, like a carnivore this or vegan this or something like that, and you change it, you know, then people are gonna be like, what the hell? You create your brand, your business around a handle or a particular diet, and you change it, then it's obviously gonna be harmful for your business and harmful for your, biggest social media status overall. So you dig in much harder if you're identified as part of a certain group of dieters or whatever other ideology it is. I think, I think a great example of that is, a person I strongly disagree with on a lot of things, Carnivore, MD or Paul Saladino. But something that Best name ever. Yeah. Yeah. I know. But, that that said, one thing I do respect about him is that he went as far as I understand, he was carnivore MD, and then he semi recently switched to, going by his his full name, Paul Saladino, which, and he also incorporated a lot more, fruits into his diet when he was, I think, almost primarily all, I think I think all meat. In the beginning, it was all meat. At the at the beginning, which, I mean, to me, in that scenario where his name is Carnivore MD and having to to make that shift, I I I mean, as much as I disagree with them, I have to say that I I really respect that that shift. So it it's difficult, but exactly to your guys' point, it's it's very difficult to do that, especially when you have a huge, following of individuals that it it's to a certain degree, in certain instances, it's a pretty unhealthy admiration for the, social media influencers. So to have that conscientiousness to say, hey, I need to I need to change my stance on something. And especially when you've got products attributed to it is incredibly difficult. So he's he's he's selling coffee now. So Well, hey. I I think we're on board with coffee. Yeah. But, you know, you it was the devil last year. Oh, was it? Oh, that's right. As a matter of fact, I created a video about that. I completely forgot about that. That is, I did not realize he was selling coffee. I'm assuming there's something special about the coffee. Is he selling coffee? It's mold Which is having it. Years. Yeah. Yeah. I think he's just recently started to sell that. Yeah. But, I mean, it's, you know, fine to change your mind. Right? You can you can obviously do that, then you can explain the reasons for that. But, I guess the issue is that if you're so sure that your coffee is bad and next year you start selling it or you're so sure that vegetables are bad or whatever, and then you start eating them. So I've been I guess it's you know, what what I like is that, you know, if someone is super sure about it, that, okay, this is true. This is this is false. This is the right way to eat. It's just a red flag that they don't actually understand the nuance and they don't understand the context. And they're just dig in based on their identity and based on, just opinion or ignorance that they're so sure. But, you know, in the example of someone like Paul, or, you know, there's many other examples you can make is that I'm sure there's vegans who turn animal based. Then there's, you know, you can find examples of this all the time. So if someone is so sure about something, then, they probably don't really appreciate the context because our podcast here, you know, we, we never came to absolutes. We, always, on the edge of the context, though. There's a very, you know, it sounds like we don't like we're very vague or that we're not giving clear answers, but that's because there are no clear answers. That is always context dependent that are very nuanced. But if someone is, it's just more easier to sell if you're super confident than that people tend to gravitate towards confidence because it makes them feel that the person knows what they're talking about. Meanwhile, you have people that are gonna be listening to this and they're gonna say, well, why can't you guys just give me the answer? Right? And I I understand. Like, I understand that mentality. I understand. Like, I want to just just tell me what I need to do. Right? And I I can empathize with that, but exactly to Sim's point. I think that's such an astute observation that for a lot of conversations, especially when you talk to researchers, Greg, you know this well, There's, there's a lot of a lot of like, well, yeah. I mean, maybe we could look at it from that perspective, but I think I would probably add this one quick caveat in this situation. And, you know, it's, it's, it's like trying to catch water, you know, it just slips right through your fingers because it's, there's so much data that we need to be able to be really confident about things. But to be clear, dear listener, there are things that we are pretty confident about. Like, I don't think any, any person or most people would not disagree that like exercise is beneficial for health. Like things like that. You know, we can make some statements that with mass inputs of data, we've come to the conclusion. I don't think regardless of how we slice the data, you're almost always gonna come out with a conclusion of, yes, this is beneficial or this is harmful. Trans fats is another example. I think we've come to the conclusion that trans fats tend to be, detrimental to CLA, Nick. CLA? CLA is a trans fat, technically. So natural trans fat found in animal foods, not too bad. I'm I'm I'm being a jerk, but I'm actually reinforcing your point, which is that there there are nuances to this stuff and there are some general principles that hold. Exactly. I just enjoy I just enjoy being a pain in the ass. Yeah. I would expect nothing else. Or being being obese typically is not a good thing for your health. Like, things like that we can agree on. And as we keep getting more data, we can start slicing deeper and deeper into those nuances. And, and when you you talk to experts and you tell them this is my circumstance, what should I do? They are able to be like, oh, in your circumstance, this is what the data is is tending towards. And you can get a lot more specific recommendations, but, you know, go going to a podcast and getting, you know, coffee is bad without any context or whatever. Unless it's my coffee. Yeah. Unless it's my coffee, of course. Then, you know, that that that can, that can seem enticing because it's so simple, but it leads to, a lot of backtracking if a person is ethical. And in the worst scenario, which is often the case, it just leads to a lot of confusion and dogmatism that that comes along with that. So on that bright note, do you do you guys have any, final words to any any last bits of wisdom that you'd like to impart? Go and buy Paul Saladino's coffee. I was just thinking when you're saying that, I I find it almost unbelievable that he's selling coffee now, but him being the carnivore MD, I thought, I wonder if it's kopi luwak. Do you know kopi luwak? No. Copy luwak is a type of coffee that originated in Indonesia where they basically feed coffee beans to civets type of cat. And then they poo out the beans and then they use the beans for their coffee. And some people claim that it's the best coffee on the planet. It's objectively not. And they sell it for extortionate prices. But I thought him being the carnival MD, maybe that way he's, he's getting some of the, the civet microbiota capitalizing on a fellow animal. And so he's turned into some sort of animal food, but it sounds like it's probably not the case. It's probably just some washed coffee from Costa Rica. Anyway, it's very entertaining. God, I love this stuff. For sure. Yeah. I've never heard of that before. I'm gonna look into it now. It's really unethical too. I find it so interesting that people get so worked up about this stuff. I mean, we might see it in comments on this video, that people really lay into people online because they're speaking about nutrition and because what they say conflicts with how they do things. And if you're that type of person, just stop doing that because honestly, you're wasting your time. It doesn't help anyone. And as a general comment, I think a big problem in the world feels like we've shifted to politics. Big problem in the world is that people pay attention to the wrong people and that puts more eyes on them. So if you've got someone who's clearly spouting complete nonsense, just ignore them. Just stop following them. So, yeah, fair another positive note to end on there. You're welcome. Seem, do you have any any final words? Any parting words? Yeah. I think, many people might overthink the nutrition. I think, the human body is very adaptable, and we can thrive on many different types of diets. Inuit living in the North, eating a very different diet than the Maasai or people in the Amazonian Rainforest etcetera, So humans can obviously thrive on many different diets. They can be low carb. They can be high carb. They can be more plant based, more animal based. There's underlying principles that matter more than the actual food that you eat. Now, if you eat certain foods, you're gonna be more aligned with those principles, namely eating predominantly whole foods and not enough not in a very large quantities so that you maintain calorie balance. But there are the the principles matter more rather than there's some specific food out there that is, the best food or miraculous food. Certain foods are better than others. You don't need to always eat the best food. It's like, you know, if you have a Ferrari, you don't need to take the Ferrari to a supermarket every day. You can take your Toyota to the supermarket, every once in a while. So it's just, yeah, like the overall lifestyle matters a lot and nutrition is obviously a big part of that lifestyle. And you don't need to get caught up with a specific diet, especially if that is influenced by politics or identity politics or something like that. Because then you know it's not actually rooted in nutrition. It's rooted in the politics if you're eating in a certain way influenced by politics. So, I guess, eat a balanced diet is quite important or the easiest takeaway is to eat different types of foods, not too much and adjust your lifestyle based on adjusting nutrition, I guess, based on actual the signal your body's giving you, the blood work, the gastrointestinal symptoms, the sleep problems or exercise performance, etcetera, and adjust the nutrition based on the goals and the, what your body is telling you. Yeah. Can I ask you a question to finish with? Sure. Yeah. It's the, it's the question that everyone's been dying to hear the answer to, and that is, Nick, tell us about your diet. And all that folks, we're gonna end this podcast. Yeah. I'm not gonna answer that. But you you'd be shocked how many comments I get just, all people assuming what what I eat, and then they'll they'll exactly to your guys' point. I bet you're a raging carnival. Yes. I'm coming out with my own coffee soon, fed to cats. Okay. So so we we could definitely end it on that.