We've all heard of these people who can sleep four hours a night and be just fine. I'm not talking about the entrepreneur who brags about grinding on five hours of sleep while quietly shaving years off their life. I'm talking about the people who genetically sleep four to six hours without seeming side effects on their health. In fact, here's the crazy part. They might also have a lower risk of Alzheimer's and dementia, despite sleeping way less than what we're told is healthy. These people are what's called natural short sleepers, and they have a genetic condition called familial natural short sleep. Now before you think that you're one of these people, realize that only one to three percent of the population has these genes. So if you're sleeping four to six hours and you feel tired, you're just undersleeping and you're harming your health. Now the real question is, do these people live shorter because they sleep shorter? Compared to the general population who experiences short sleep and sleep deprivation, natural short sleepers do live longer. That's obvious. They don't experience the same harmful effects of short sleep as regular people because of their genetics. This is why it's important to, by default, not presume that you have these genes that make you sleep shorter. That's because you might end up harming your health. It seemed that people who get adequate sleep live about five years longer than those who don't get adequate sleep. So if you restrict your sleep without having these favorable genetics, you're just harming your health and you're increasing the risk of heart disease, Alzheimer's, and cancer. Earlier, I mentioned that natural short sleepers might be protected against Alzheimer's and dementia. A 2022 study on mice saw that two mutations in familial natural short sleepers, DEC two and NPSR one, reduced the development of tau and amyloid proteins that are causally implicated in neurodegeneration and Alzheimer's dementia. So what makes these two specific mutations so special? DEC two gene is a key regulator of the circadian rhythms. People and mice with this mutation sleep one and a half to two hours less while maintaining normal cognition and brain health. MPSR one boosts the activity of arousal promoting brain circuits, which reduces sleep need. Mice with this mutation have better memory even during sleep deprivation. Both of these mutations significantly reduce the amount of beta amyloid and tau protein accumulation in the brain that would otherwise lead to development of Alzheimer's. It means that people with these rare mutations sleep faster. They have much higher quality sleep at a shorter duration of time. There's no evidence that natural short sleepers would live longer than otherwise healthy people who sleep seven to eight hours, but there's also no evidence that they will live shorter than these individuals. Natural short sleepers with these specific genes do live longer than people who sleep four to six hours without these genes, but they don't appear to live shorter than people who sleep seven to eight hours without these favorable genetics. Now, this might change in the future. We don't know necessarily what the outcome will be in a few decades. Maybe they will increase the risk of Alzheimer's or some other disease. We don't know that yet. But based on the evidence right now, they don't live shorter, but they're not gonna live longer than regular people who sleep seven to eight hours either. They can just sleep shorter while maintaining their brain health on shorter amount of sleep. You do hear that you need to sleep seven to eight hours, but the majority of studies indicate that seven hours per night is associated with the lowest mortality risk. In fact, eight hours per night is often associated with a higher risk than six hours, as shown by this 2016 meta analysis of 32 studies. A very interesting example of this are the Japanese people who do sleep slightly shorter than people in the Western populations, and they still live longer. The Japanese people sleep on average three hundred and fifty two minutes or five point eight hours a night. Yet, they're people with the highest life expectancy of 85.27. Japanese people are generally healthier than the Western population. They have less body fat. They eat less food. They eat healthier food. So theoretically, their demand for sleep could also be slightly lower. But Japanese people also take quite a lot of naps. One study found that twenty one point two percent of Japanese men and seventeen point one percent of Japanese women take a nap over four times a week. That's quite frequent. Spain, which is known for taking afternoon siestas, has only eighteen percent of people taking naps over four times a week. But Spain's average nighttime sleep duration is also six point nine hours, one hour longer than the Japanese. And Spain's life expectancy is 83.94 years, which is less than half a year shorter than Japan. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices, which are the bone charged red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes. They do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin antiaging, hormone optimization, pain management, and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes, especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the Bond Charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most regular therapeutic says don't have the right wavelengths of light, which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Boncharge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research, and they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code SIIM, s I I m, for a 15% discount. Let's talk a little bit more about these super short sleep genes. A 2021 review outlined four major genes: DEC2, NPSR1, mGAR1, and Beta1 AR mutant genes. DEC two p three eight five r mutation leads to reduced nREM and REM sleep, and it delays recovery after sleep deprivation. MPSR one y two zero six h gain of function mutation causes shorter sleep and enhanced memory retention despite the sleep deprivation. MGlor one mutations are associated with short sleep, about twenty five minutes less, but they show less impact than the other mutations. A d r b one a one eight seven v mutation found in several familiar natural short sleeper families causes about a hundred and thirty two minutes less sleep per night due to increased wakefulness. Some of these genes work by reducing your sleep demand. Your body just requires less sleep, and you recover faster. But some of these genes also increase the wakefulness chemicals in your brain, making you stay awake more easily. So it's not just about reducing the sleep demand. It's also about just making you more alert and wakeful. So how much sleep is then optimal for regular people? It seems that people with these natural short sleep genes, they're gonna be fine sleeping four to six hours. If you sleep seven hours and you feel fine, then you're probably not harming your health by sleeping seven hours as opposed to eight hours. If you feel that you need to sleep eight or even nine hours, then that's also generally gonna be fine. Maybe you're just exercising more, you need to recover more, you need to sleep more, or maybe you're just catching up on some lost sleep. Just don't deliberately try to restrict your sleep to four to six hours. If you feel bad when sleeping four to six hours or even less than seven hours, then you probably don't have these natural short sleep genes and you're just harming your health. Because as I said, it's very unlikely that you have these genes because only one to three percent of the population has them. So how do you know if you are one of these natural short sleepers? The first indication is that you're able to sleep four to six hours every night and function normally without side effects. You feel great and you're rested. You also don't get any cognitive deficits or adverse health markers from sleeping short, such as high blood pressure or high blood sugar. You also need less catch up sleep after longer sleep deprivation. If you missed an entire night's sleep, you'll still end up sleeping around four to six hours, as opposed to eight to ten hours like a regular person would. Secondly, you have other close family members who are similar to you. They also sleep short without side effects. That's because familial natural short sleep runs in families, as the name suggests. Third, you do a DNA test to see if you actually have these short sleep genes. Whole genome sequencing is your best option. Specifically, look for the mutations in the genes that I mentioned earlier. DEC two gene with the mutation p three eight four r or y three six two h. The n p s r one gene with the mutation y two zero six h, the a d r b one gene with the mutation a one eight seven v, the g r m one gene with the mutation s four five eight a or r eight eight nine w. Commercial DNA tests like twenty three and me, Ancestor DNA, and MyHeritage are not able to detect these natural short sleep mutations. A big reason why these natural short sleepers are able to sleep short is because their sleep quality is much higher. They're able to compress more recovery in shorter amounts of sleep. For regular people, what it means is that the quality of her sleep is as important as the quantity of her sleep. Sleeping eight to nine hours or ten hours with sleep apnea is the equivalent of sleeping four to six hours without apnea. Likewise, six to seven hours of high quality uninterrupted sleep is probably the equivalent of eight hours regular sleep. If you want to know how I increased my sleep scores from the seventies to 100, then check out this video next.