Walking seems very simple, but it's one of the most misunderstood types of exercise. 10,000 steps a day is useless. It's a made up thing. You don't need to walk at all. Just lift weights or do HIIT cardio. Check out this cool new Japanese walking technique. It beats regular walking. In this video I'm breaking down what does the science actually say about walking, how many steps you should take, what kind of walking gives you the best results, and how to make your walks work for you. Let's start with what everyone has heard about. 10 ks steps a day. We've all heard that you should walk at least 10,000 steps a day to be healthy. But the truth is that yes, the 10 k steps a day recommendation came from a 1964 Japanese marketing campaign that was selling a tracking device for tracking your steps. Now this doesn't mean that walking 10,000 steps a day is bad for your health, quite the opposite. A 2023 meta analysis, 111,000 participants and 12 studies looked at how many steps correlates with the lowest risk of mortality and heart disease. The biggest reduction in the risk of all cause mortality was seen when you go from walking 2,000 steps a day to walking 8,700 steps a day which results in a sixty percent lower all cause mortality risk. Going from 8,700 to sixteen thousand steps provides an an additional five percent risk reduction. This means that the bulk of the benefits of walking come from going from being a couch potato 2,000 steps a day to 8,700 steps a day which is only one and a half hours of walking throughout the day. You do get additional benefits by going beyond that up to 16,000 which is 5% additional benefits but it requires doubling your step count. Walking 10 k steps a day is still associated with a slightly better risk compared to 8,700 steps but the benefits are small. 10 k steps a day is just a easy heuristic you can use. It's a number that you can just memorize and if you have a tracker you can just track it. Personally I am still aiming for around 10 ks steps a day. On most days I'm probably between 9,011 steps. But I'm trying to go above the 8,700 steps a day. Because there's additional reasons to why walking more than 8,700 steps a day could be better. This 2020 study on over 8,000,000 Fitbit users saw that daily step count correlated linearly with HRV. The higher the daily step count, the higher the HRV across all ages. They saw increases in HRV with up to 20,000 steps per day. This is not a very robust clinical study but it does show that people who walk more up to 20 ks steps a day have higher HRV. And because it's done only on Fitbit users you reduce the potential for healthy user bias because everyone who has a Fitbit is already more invested and interested in a healthy lifestyle. It's not a perfect study but it does have some insight. I personally have seen that my HRV is higher if I walk more. If I walk 16,000 or 20,000 steps a day, my HRV is higher compared to 10,000 or 8,000 steps. Now let's talk about the distribution of those steps because that is also quite relevant. This 2025 study divided people into groups based on the duration of their most frequent walking bouts, less than five minutes, five to ten minutes, ten to fifteen minutes, and over fifteen minutes. The results show that longer walking bouts over fifteen minutes were associated with the lowest risk of mortality as well as heart disease even when the total daily step count remained under 8,000 steps. Walking bouts shorter than five minutes had the highest risk. So it looks like if you do go for a walk, you should walk for over fifteen minutes in a go rather than just walking for five minutes. But the limitation of this study is that it might be a case of reverse causation. People who can't walk longer than fifteen minutes end up walking around five to ten minutes and they have some mobility issue, some other health concern or they're just very old. They're just physically not able to walk that long. But personally I am inclined to think that walking longer than fifteen minutes is better for you than walking just five minutes because it has better cardiovascular effects to walk a bit longer. Walking for just five minutes really doesn't get your heart rate that elevated whereas walking for fifteen to thirty minutes it can get your heart rate slightly higher. You can think of it the same way as push ups, let's say your maximum push up is 20, if you do just five push ups it's not gonna make you stronger But if you train 18 push ups, your max is 20, you do sets of 18 push ups that's close to your failure, over time you will get stronger because it's closer to your maximum. The same way with walking. So with that being said, I do think that walking longer than fifteen minutes is better than walking only five minutes. So if you were to distribute your daily walking, have slightly longer walks fifteen to thirty minutes. This brings me to the Japanese interval walking that has gone semi viral on social media. Intral walking was developed by Japanese researchers in 2009 and they found that five months of this improved the indices of lifestyle diseases by ten to twenty percent on average. What improved were things like blood pressure, knee extension strength, and aerobic capacity. A 2024 review on interval walking saw that in several randomized controlled trials on older people, interval walking resulted in slightly better glycemic control and blood pressure compared to regular continuous walking. So what does this interval walking look like? Three minutes of fast walking, roughly 70% of peak aerobic capacity. Three minutes of slow walking, 40% of peak aerobic capacity and repeated for five times five times per week. Basically walking fast for three minutes and walking regularly for three minutes. The caveat is that this interval walking is studied in elderly people. These people can run, they can't do other forms of exercise so walking a little bit faster will again get their heart rate slightly more elevated than regular walking would. Interval walking might be the only form of exercise these elderly people do which is obviously better than nothing. Younger people who can still run, they can sprint, they can jump, they can lift weights, they will benefit from regular exercise. And the interval walking, yeah it might have some additional benefits beyond regular walking but if you're already doing more structured exercise a few times a week then you really don't need to be doing this interval walking. It might actually be too much especially if you're on a more advanced exercise program. Just go for a regular walk. There is however research on exercise snacks being good for your heart health and VO2 max. It's not specifically about walking but the studies do highlight the benefits of elevating your heart rate in between periods of rest. For example, you go for a sixty second sprint up the stairs to get your heart rate elevated a few times a day. Alright, let me give you some of the most important things to keep in mind when it comes to walking. 8,700 steps per day is better than 2,000 steps per day but up to 16,000 steps is better than 8,700 steps. Although the majority of benefits come from going from 2,000 to 8,700 steps. Longer walks are better than shorter walks. You should have at least a few fifteen minutes of continuous walking per day instead of having only five minute walks. Interval walking is great if you can't do other forms of interval training. If you can do the norwegian four by four hit workout then you don't need to do interval walking. If you're an older person who can't exercise then interval walking can be a good alternative. I don't really consider walking exercise but it is a good form of physical activity. You definitely should walk everyday. If you want to know about my full evidence based longevity routine of which walking is a part of then check out this video next.