Last year, I made a video about MitoPure, which is a $112 per month supplement that's supposed to eliminate old mitochondria and increase exercise performance for antiaging. They even have clinical trials claiming MitoPure increased muscle strength by 12% and and endurance by 17% without exercise. If you remember that video, then you would know that these studies actually didn't show benefits for endurance, and they only saw increased muscle strength for the lower body, not upper body. But there's a lot more to the story. Recently, there was a new study on Mitopur that's also kinda sus, and I've gained some insight from some of the additional flaws in their earlier studies that raises the question, is Mitopur even a mitophagy activator? Let's talk about the new study on immune system functioning. They took 50 healthy middle aged adults and gave them a thousand milligrams of urenithin a or placebo for four weeks. Their primary goal of this study, what they wrote in the abstract was, quote, phenotypical changes in peripheral CD three plus T cell subsets and immune metabolic remodeling. This refers to changes in immune cell characteristics. However, if you examine the pre registered clinical trial on clinicaltrials.gov, the initial primary endpoint was quote, change in percentages of CD3 plus T cell immune cell population, in particular, number of CD8 plus T memory stem cells and naive like T cells. In the published abstract, the authors report only an increase in naive like CD8 T cells and CD eight fatty acid oxidation. They don't mention that CD eight plus T memory stem cells and CD three T cells, the primary endpoints, didn't change. So basically, they didn't see any change in the markers they were originally set out to investigate. That null result is stated only later in the full text in a single sentence with no further elaboration. Quote, the percentage of t memory stem cells remained unaltered in contrast to our previous in vitro observations. If you look at their graph for their primary outcomes, then the only primary outcome with a statistically significant change was naive CD eight plus T cells and markers of CD eight cell proliferation and exhaustion, like Ki67 and TOX. T memory stem cells remain unchanged, and so did CD3, CD8, and CD4 cells. While some of these markers supported their hypothesis, more than half of their primary outcomes, T memory stem cells and CD3 plus populations showed no change. Now, this might sound like nitpicking, but this kind of selective reporting creates a much more optimistic impression of urolithin a especially mitochondria. This is a classic example of reporting bias. You report only the positive outcomes that support your hypothesis and support your goals or your claims and you disregard and don't report about the findings that don't support your findings. This is especially concerning given the fact that they initially set out to research these things when they saw that there was no effect on these things, they shift their focus on other things that they measured, which wasn't even the initial goal. And they put 99% of the focus on these markers that did show a positive improvement. And then they glance over these markers, the ones they were initially supposed to research, and they only mention it very briefly and try to bury it in the text. There's a good reason why researchers are required to pre register clinical trials. Pre registration forces scientists to clearly define what they're measuring and what their hypotheses are before they see the data. This ensures transparency. You're held accountable for reporting all of the pre specified outcomes, not just the ones that support your hypothesis. When your results match your hypothesis, that's a positive finding. But if they don't, or if there's no significant effect, which is the case in this might appear study, you've reached a null result, and that's equally important to report. A null result means your hypothesis was wrong or unsupported, and that's still valuable scientific information to know if it didn't work. The issue is that the authors clearly downplay the null result for the T memory stem cells and the CD3 plus T cells, which were their initial primary outcomes. In the conclusion of the paper, the authors state that urolithin A may help counteract age related immune decline. However, this claim is not well supported by their own data. In the context of immune aging, T memory stem cells are widely recognized as more critical than naive CD eight plus T cells. T memory stem cells are long lived self renewing cells capable of differentiating into all downstream memory and effector T cell subsets, including CD8 plus cytotoxic T cells. The decline in T memory stem cells is a key hallmark of immune aging. While the study did find a modest increase in naive CD a plus T cells, it found no significant change in T memory stem cells and CD three T cells, which was part of the pre registered primary endpoint. This completely weakens the foundation for for suggesting that urethane a meaningfully counteracts immune aging. What's more, the increase in CD8 T cells isn't that significant. They saw only a zero point five percent increase in phenotypic state, where they looked less exhausted, zero point five percent, and a fourteen point seven two percent increase in fatty acid oxidation capacity. If you ask any immunologist, they would say that these changes wouldn't do much of anything to someone's immune system functioning, especially during aging. And especially given the fact that T memory stem cells showed no statistical difference. Secondly, they also didn't research old people. The research subjects were in their fifties, who don't exhibit the degree of immunological decline seen in older populations, such as the ones in their seventies and eighties. So based on their own data, it's wrong to say that urolithin a could help to counteract age related immune decline, because based on their data, it's a pipe dream. Now this is just a single study and it's not enough to completely disregard urolithin a or Mytopure. Researchers make mistakes, and sometimes it's just a mistake. Or sometimes they just were too optimistic and they misinterpreted their data. However, the previous clinical trials on urethane a have had similar issues in regards to transparency and interpreting the data. All of these studies and Mitopur's own marketing makes it seem that Mitopur is the best longevity supplement out there, which is definitely not the case. In my first video on Mitopur, I shared a study that said that four months of Mitopur supplementation upregulated mitophagy markers in humans. Mitophagy being the process of clearing out all mitochondria through the process of autophagy. However, I got some insight from my very reputable and very well published mitochondria researcher who shared with me the glaring flaws in this study. First off, they started with 29 people in the placebo, twenty nine in the five hundred milligrams of Mitopur group, and thirty people in the one thousand milligrams of Mitopur group. However, they report the final outcome on mitophagy markers on only six individuals. That's 80% fewer people than who were actually receiving Mitopur in both the five hundred and one thousand milligram group. Six people is a very small sample size and I don't think it's enough evidence to claim that Mitopur increases mitophagy in humans based on this data, especially when it looks like they excluded 80% of their sample size and ended up with only six people. What happened to those 80% of other people? Now the devil's advocate could be that to measure mitophagy, you need a muscle myopsy, and that's a very uncomfortable and semi painful process. So most of the subjects probably would opt out of this procedure, but there's no mention of this in the paper. If eighty percent of the subjects decided not to get the biopsy, then they should have written about it in the paper, but they don't even mention it. They don't mention why there was a eighty percent drop in their sample size. They just report that they measured the mitophagy markers in six people when there was eighty percent more people receiving the Mitopur to begin with. And even then, six people is a very small sample size to claim that Mitopur is a mitophagy activator and therefore good for muscle aging. They exclusively pre frame Mitopur as a mitophagy activator in the new immune cell paper. The title of their paper is quote, effect of the mitophagy inducer, urethane a, on age related immune decline. They're writing it as a fact that might appear as a mitophagy activator, but I wouldn't say it's a fact based on six people. The rest of the study looked at some functional fitness markers like grip strength, VO2, peak power output, six minute walk test, and hamstring strength. Hamstring strength increased by 10 to 12%, but interestingly, the five hundred milligram group saw the 12% increase, whereas the one thousand milligram group saw only 9.8% increase. There's also something strange about these two graphs showing hamstring muscle strength and leg flexion. Can you spot it? Well, they look a 100% identical. The only difference is the p values and numbers on the graphs, but the actual data points are a 100% identical. This looks like copy pasted graphs, and usually something like this would have the paper retracted. It's just another dot on the graph of suspicion. There was no statistical difference in hand grip strength, so no effect in upper body strength between urolithin a and placebo. There was a 1.6% increase in VO2 peak in the five hundred milligram group and a 10% increase in the one thousand milligram group. However, the placebo group has two massive outliers that drag down the results of the placebo group, and there are two massive outliers in the one thousand milligram burelithin a group, which increases the r o two results. Without these outliers, there wouldn't have been any statistical significance between these groups. It might be just outliers, and it's normal, but it's kind of a strange coincidence, especially given the fact that there was no statistical difference in peak power output or how fast they can go at peak effort. The peak power output was their initial primary endpoint, which based on their data, they didn't meet. That's another null hypothesis. They do write about it in the study that they didn't meet this primary endpoint, but they do focus a lot more on the secondary outcomes like VO two and six minute walking test. But the VO two results are driven by four big outliers in the placebo and the one thousand milligram urolithin a group. Lastly, the six minute walk test. There was no difference for the five hundred milligram group, but the one thousand milligram group saw a 33 meter increase. So these people were able to walk 33 meters further during the six minutes compared to not taking urethane a. Do whatever you will with this information. So based on this study, might appear had very mixed results. They did see an increase in hamstring torque by 10 to 12%, But interestingly, the 12% increase was in the five hundred milligram group. The one thousand milligram group saw only 9.8% increase. In the VO two peak, the five hundred milligram group saw almost no effects, only 1.6% increase in VO two, whereas the one thousand milligram group saw about 10% increase in VO two, which was driven by two massive outliers. Naturally, you would see some sort of consistency between the dosages and, like, a dose response curve. You would expect that if the higher dose group, the 1,000 group, sees an increase in v o two, you would also expect that this group would also see an increase in the hamstring strength. But that's not the case. In the hamstring strength, the five hundred milligram group saw greater results than the one thousand milligram group. Whereas in the v o two, the five hundred milligram group saw almost no effects, and the one thousand milligram group saw 10% increase in effects. So which dose should you take? Should you take the five hundred milligram group, or should you take the one thousand milligram group? Maybe it depends on your goals, but might appear markets urethane a to improve your endurance based on five hundred milligrams. The truth is the five hundred milligrams has almost no effects on endurance. I'm definitely not convinced that Midopyr would increase muscle endurance or endurance performance, and an even earlier study proves it even further. It was published in JAMA in 2022, and they gave 30 healthy older adults between ages 65 and ninety one thousand milligrams of urethane a for four months. They did conclude in their paper that might appear increased endurance. However, after four months, there was no significant difference in the six minute walking test compared to placebo. So how did they conclude that urethane A increases endurance? They measured endurance by looking at the ability to repeatedly contract muscles at 70% max effort. And at the two month mark, the Mitopure group saw a significant improvement in endurance. However, at the four month mark, there was no difference between the placebo group and the Mitopur group as both groups' endurance had increased. So yes, Mitopur increased endurance by the two month mark, but by the four month mark, the placebo group also saw an increase in endurance, so there was no statistical difference between the two groups. So based on this logic, if you wanted to increase your endurance, you would have waited two additional months and you would have gotten the same benefits as if you had taken Mitopur. The author still concluded, and it shared in their marketing, that Mitopur increases endurance by 17%. But that conclusion was based on a finding at the middle of the study. And by the end of the study, there was no difference in endurance. As you can see throughout this video, Mitopur has very good marketing. They have very convincing marketing. But in my opinion, the real data about Mitopur isn't as optimistic. And the real data about Mitopur suggests that it has very mixed results and the results you do get aren't significant. The biggest irony in all of this is that Mitopur is most often promoted by alternative medical doctors and health influencers who criticize big pharma and big food. Mitopur is owned by the company TimeLine Nutrition who received a large amount of investment from Nestle. Yes. Nestle, one of the biggest food companies in the world, and according to a lot of those same influencers, is the root of all health problems in the world. But right now, Nestle is having those same influencers that criticize it, promote its expensive overpriced supplement that has a lot of sketchy and misrepresented studies. The most likely explanation to this is that these influencers and doctors, they didn't read the studies or they didn't understand these studies. They just read the abstract they believed what might have told them, and they didn't looked into the data. That's their most charitable interpretation. The least charitable interpretation is that they do understand it, which is not likely the case, and they still promote it because of money. After all, it's a supplement that costs a $120 a month for a single ingredient, and you know that they have very high profit margins at that price. That's because they own the patent for euro less than a, and they can get away with charging a $120 a month because they have no competition. I actually got an email from TimeLine Nutrition a year ago with an offer to become their affiliate. Well, obviously, they didn't watch my first video where I criticized their research findings, and I obviously just ignored their email because I wouldn't be making this video here. I'm not saying that MitraPure is the worst supplement in the world or it's actively harming your health. It's just that the effects of MitraPure are grossly overstated. The average customer gets the impression that MitraPure is pretty much the best longevity supplement out there. It's backed up by clinical trials, etcetera, etcetera. But as I showed you in this video, MitraPure doesn't increase upper body strength. It doesn't really increase endurance. It doesn't really change immune cells that significantly. It's questionable whether or not it really increases mitophagy markers. And the only thing it does is increase hamstring torque by about 10%. Keep in mind that these studies are done with no exercise. You're expected to gain significantly more effects on your muscle strength than endurance by just exercising. For example, just eight weeks of resistance training in older adults has been seen to increase muscle strength by a 180%, muscle size by 9%, and walking speed by 48% compared to placebo. So compared to exercise, MitraPure is pennies. It has small effects, but I wouldn't rank it as a god tier supplement, if that makes sense. If you want to know how I rank a 100 other common popular supplements from worst to best, then check out this video next.