Women live on average five to ten years longer than men do. Not only that, but centenarians, the people who live over the age of 100, are disproportionately female. 80 to 90% of them are women. If you look at the list of the oldest people to have ever lived, then the first 27 of them are female and the first man is number 28. The oldest women were John Clement aged 122 and Kanet Tanaka and Sarac Nos at age 119. The oldest men were Jerome and Kimura aged a 116 and Christian Mortensen and Emiliano Mercado del Toro aged a 115. That's a five year gap between the oldest living men and the oldest living women who all have supposedly good genetics and a decent lifestyle that enabled them to live so long. The most obvious explanation for this is that men are unhealthier, they eat worse diets, they drink more alcohol, and they smoke. Men have more dangerous vocations, they follow riskier behavior, and they're expected to sacrifice themselves like on the Titanic. But there seems to be something more biological about it as well. You see a similar phenomenon in animals, and it's even more skewed. Mammalian females live on average 18.6% longer than mammalian males, whereas human females live 7.8% longer than human males. Nobody knows the exact reason why women live longer than men, but there are a few theories. One of the theories is the difference in hormones, especially estrogen and androgens. Women during their reproductive years have an average four times more estrogen than males. Both men and women have estrogen, but women have significantly more. Only after menopause, which happens in women's early fifties, you see a massive drop in estrogen close to zero. Coincidentally, you see a spike in the risk of hip fractures, heart disease, and Alzheimer's after that. Estrogen is considered the primary female hormone, but it has a lot of other health benefits. Estrogen is cardioprotective, neuroprotective, and it increases the expression of antioxidant enzymes. So it might be that women have fifty years where their high estrogen levels are slowing down the development of heart disease and neurodegeneration which means they add an extra five to ten years to their life. Whereas men who don't have high estrogen are starting to develop these diseases already in their thirties and forties. You have to understand that heart disease and Alzheimer's, they don't start in your fifties or sixties. In fact, they start in your youth and they take decades to progress. The higher estrogen levels in women buffer against that progression which gives them an additional few years of life. Things get really interesting when you see that non feminizing estrogens like 17 extend lifespan by nineteen percent in male mice but not in female mice. Obviously, there are no human trials looking at the effects of seventeen alpha estradiol on the effects of heart disease mortality or all cause mortality in humans, but it's quite interesting. In women, hormone replacement therapy with estrogen does appear to reduce the risk of heart disease and all cause mortality, but not for all women of all ages. The optimal time for hormone replacement therapy appears to be in women less than 60 years of age or less than 10 years since menopause. That would support the idea that estrogen reduces the risk of heart disease. Not only is estrogen cardio protective, but male androgenic hormones appear to be promoting aging. Testosterone is the main androgen, but there's also dehydrotestosterone DHT, dehydroepiandrosterone, DHEA, androstenedione, and many others. Androgens are responsible for male characteristics such as a deep voice, broad shoulders, higher muscle mass, body hair, etcetera. As you see from these pictures, you can already know which of these men has high androgens and which one has lower androgens despite being depicted at the same chronological age with AI. One hypothesis is that androgens have immunosuppressive and proclotting effects, which could explain the increased risk of heart disease and cancer in men. Men have 10 to 18 times more testosterone in the blood than women, and the immunosuppressive effects of testosterone appear to be weaker in women than in men. Androgens like DHT have an immunosuppressive role, and they suppress antibody production and t cells, which can leave the organism more vulnerable to cancer. This might also explain why men have much lower rates of autoimmune diseases than women. Male immune cells are being suppressed by androgens, which does reduce the risk of autoimmunity but might increase the risk of cancer. Androgen deprivation therapies are one of the main treatment options for prostate cancer that affects only men. It does make the person feel extremely tired and with no libido, as well as increase the risk of dementia, but androgen deprivation therapy increases the chance of surviving the cancer, although it doesn't always work. Now there's no evidence that having normal androgen levels would increase the risk of cancer for an otherwise healthy male, but it appears that high androgen levels when you already have cancer can be harmful. Testosterone obviously is beneficial in many ways and low testosterone levels are also associated with increased mortality especially among older men. Low testosterone lowers muscle mass, increases visceral fat mass, and reduces blood sugar regulation, all of which are harmful. So my takeaway of this research isn't that you should try to lower your testosterone or lower your androgens. It just might be that extremely high androgenic hormones are bad for overall maximum lifespan. I'm talking about living to the age of 120 and beyond. Instead, there are some general health related differences in men and women that can add several years to your life expectancy as a male. When you look at things like body fat percentage and metabolic health, then based on research, men appear to develop cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and metabolic syndrome a lot faster than women do. For women, it's okay to have more body fat, and it doesn't appear to matter how much body fat a woman has as long as they're not severely underweight or morbidly obese. For men, however, anything above 15% body fat is linearly associated with increased mortality risk and heart disease. The same with fitness. A 2021 UK Biobank study found that low cardiorespiratory fitness was associated with higher all cause mortality in both men and women regardless of weight status. However, body fatness modified mortality risk in men, but not clearly in women. In men being obese and unfit significantly raised mortality risk whereas fit obese men had no elevated risk compared to fit normal weight men. So as a man, if you want to live longer and you wanna reach the age of 100, then you need to be fit and lean rather than fat and unfit. For women, it doesn't appear to matter that much. Women can be slightly overweight and even mildly obese and is not going to increase their mortality risk. And the reason for that might be because of the hormonal differences. Estrogen makes you store more fat around the hips and under your skin, the subcutaneous fat. Whereas men tend to store the body fat more around the organs as visceral fat that is more harmful and increases your risk of heart disease a lot more. Interestingly, antidiabetic drugs like SGLT two inhibitors have been seen to extend lifespan in male mice only, but not in female mice similar to 17 alpha estradiol. In the interventions testing program, one of the SGLT two inhibitors, canagliflozin, was seen to extend median survival of male mice by fourteen percent and ninetieth percentile survival by nine percent. These mouse studies are done in a controlled environment. The male and female mice are fed the same diets, they're living in the same environment, and they're monitored. So the reason why SGLT two inhibitors extend lifespan in male mice only might be because of the differences in biology between men and women, perhaps estrogen. So it looks like men are more vulnerable to metabolic diseases and heart disease than women because of differences in hormones. And statistically speaking, if men get heart disease earlier than women do, they will have shorter life expectancy. Now, it doesn't obviously apply to all men, some men will outlive some women, that's logical. But statistically speaking, men have shorter life expectancy because of increased risk of heart disease that can be caused by a poor lifestyle, some other riskier behaviors, as well as the hormonal differences between men and women as estrogen delays the development of heart disease and neurodegeneration. Alright. So let's recap. Men have unhealthier lifestyles, and they're more vulnerable to dying because of unhealthy lifestyles and being overweight. The solution, get fit and lean as a man. Secondly, men have lower estrogen and higher androgens, which might drive faster biological aging, but the evidence isn't completely clear. You certainly shouldn't manipulate your hormones in any way based on that. Just focus on being as healthy as you can as a man. That's why I focus on following a healthy lifestyle and staying in optimal health for as long as possible. You can check out my full evidence based longevity routine video next.