I've taken over 50 blood tests in my life. My latest comprehensive 180 blood marker test showed that everything was in the optimal range. And not just optimal, but in the range for the lowest risk of mortality and longevity, which is extremely rare. I figured that instead of me just sharing my results, which provides little value to you, I'm going to share with you the biggest lessons and insights I've learned from taking a ton of blood tests in my life. First, it's important to realize what blood work is and what does it mean. Your blood has hundreds of different components, such as sugar, electrolytes, vitamins, minerals, lipids, immune cells, enzymes, etcetera. When you draw blood and send it to a lab, they're able to look at the different components inside the blood and identify how much of each molecule there is. Blood work essentially reflects what goes on inside your body. How well are your organs working and what's your current health status? We have thousands of studies correlating different blood work results with different chronic diseases and comorbidities. There are also randomized control trials where lowering or raising said blood markers either reduces or increases the risk of whatever disease you're investigating. Based on those findings, doctors diagnose chronic diseases. If your blood sugar and triglyceride levels are chronically elevated, you're heading towards the diagnosis of diabetes, which is diagnosed with a fasting glucose over a 125 milligrams per deciliter and hemoglobin a one c of over 6.5%. Before that, you can also be prediabetic. That's characterized by fasting blood sugar over a 100 milligrams per deciliter and hemoglobin a one c over 5.8%. Normal fasting blood sugar is somewhere between 70 to 90 per deciliter and hemoglobin a one c 4.5 to 5.5%. So you can see that someone who's heading towards diabetes will go from normal blood sugar to pre diabetic levels and then to full blown diabetes. You're not gonna get diabetes with normal blood sugar levels. It takes years for you to progress from normal to pre diabetes and then diabetes. If you measure your blood sugar and see that you're slowly creeping towards pre diabetes, you can reverse the trend and prevent yourself from getting type two diabetes. I actually have a family member who was recently diagnosed with diabetes. He just went to the doctor for a health checkup because of his work and the doctor said, yeah, you have diabetes. Now he has a physically active job. He's not severely obese. He has a little bit of a belly. He's not the healthiest in terms of lifestyle and dietary choices. But by looking at him you wouldn't think that he has diabetes. It's just that he never went to the doctor to get his blood drawn over the last ten years. So he never saw himself creeping towards actual diabetes. He never saw himself progressing from elevated blood sugar to pre diabetes and full diabetes. This applies to virtually all other chronic diseases and comorbidities. They get slowly worse over time. And when things get bad enough, when you cross a certain threshold in your diagnosis, you can see a sudden decline in your health. With kidney disease, you see a slow decline in kidney function that's caused by high blood sugar and high blood pressure. With metabolic syndrome, you have high blood sugar, high blood pressure, high waist circumference, high triglycerides, and low HDL cholesterol. With heart disease, which takes several decades to progress, you have high inflammation like CRP and homocysteine, high blood sugar, high blood pressure, and high lipids like Apo b and lp little a, which drive the disease progression. By understanding which biomarkers reflect what disease risk, you can modify your lifestyle, your diet, your supplements, and thus reduce your risk of developing said diseases. In my opinion, it's one of the most empowering and motivating realizations. No one is destined to get diabetes, heart disease, or kidney disease. You can measure what your current risk based on your current blood work and other biomarkers. And by controlling those blood markers, changing them, improving them, you can reduce your risk. Another important thing to realize is that blood markers obviously fluctuate. Some of them can fluctuate quite a lot even and within days. Over the last year I've had a few biomarkers being abnormally out of the range for some tests. For example, my lead levels were high back in January, a 101. But when I retested it in April, my lead was very low, less than one microgram per deciliter. That's a 10 x difference in just a few months. And the reason for that might be that I was probably exposed to some lead from food, water, or air. Not all blood markers fluctuate immensely such as inflammation markers or heavy metals. You're not gonna go from normal blood sugar levels to diabetic levels overnight. The same applies to your kidney values and your lipids, but certain markers can fluctuate a lot more. Inflammation markers can rise and fall depending on if you had an infection or you got a virus. Heavy metal levels can fluctuate depending if you ate or inhaled something that had heavy metals, and hormone levels can fluctuate based on your sleep and stress quite a lot. A single test isn't conclusive of anything, you wanna repeat the test in a few weeks to see if there is a pattern. If the follow-up test shows similar results, then that's a pattern and you might want to investigate it further. But if the follow-up test shows that it's normal, then you have nothing to worry about. I wanna take a quick break to let you know that my school community with me and my wife is now live. It's called Usman society, and it teaches you how to look and feel younger. Both me and Inka have reached top 1% of health with our biomarkers, and we can teach you to accomplish the same because we've already coached over 500 individuals. Here's what's inside our school community. Twelve plus hours of video content about reversing signs of aging and becoming healthier. We're adding new content every week and every month. Video courses on nutrition, skin care, fitness, sleep, biomarkers, and much more. New courses are added every month. Biweekly live q and a calls with us where we answer your questions about your You span journey. An in-depth overview of our own health protocols that help us to reach top 1% health. Community posts and discussions where you can get feedback and help regarding your progress. Full workout plans and meal plans that are updated regularly. Step by step walkthroughs of workouts, skin care, nutrition, and daily routines, and a WhatsApp group for daily tips and inspiration. All of this for $1 per day, and even less than that with the annual plan. Check out the link in the description or search for youth band society on school.com. School with a k. One critical thing to realize is that what's considered normal in blood work isn't necessarily optimal and best for overall health and longevity. The normal reference ranges in blood work are derived from where ninety five percent of the population would normally fall into. That's a good start because it would reflect where most people normally are. However, based on the standard distribution curve, most people would have average health, and we know that average people are not in the most optimal health. That's why we want to know what does the blood work look like for the top 10%, top 5%, and top 1% of the healthiest individuals. We also want to know the bottom 10%, 5%, and bottom 1% So we would know what do the unhealthiest people have in their blood work. For some blood markers, you can see a clear trend that what's considered normal is actually bad for your health. For example, CRP, which reflects systemic inflammation. Normal CRP levels are considered to be less than three milligrams per liter, but anything above 0.2 milligrams per liter is associated with increased risk. The optimal CRP value for lowest mortality risk is as close to zero as possible. Triglycerides are another example. In the eighties, normal triglyceride levels were considered to be less than 250 milligrams per deciliter. But since the early two thousands, they've had to decrease it to less than a 150 because they saw that anything above a 150 was associated with increased heart disease risk. However, even today, you see that anything above a 100 is still associated with increased mortality and heart disease risk. So the optimal triglyceride value is closer to fifty milligrams per deciliter rather than above a 100. This is an example of the reference ranges being updated as we get new evidence about what's optimal. It means that these blood work recommendations aren't just stagnant and ancient, something that doctors decided was normal in the fifties and they're not being updated since. No. If there's new evidence that certain markers should be lower or higher, the recommendations would be updated to fit those criteria. That's how science works. I've done all the hard work for you, and you can find the info about the optimal blood values for over 70 blood markers from my book, The Longevity Leap. It's based on over 8,000 scientific studies. You can't base your overall health around a single blood marker. It doesn't matter if it's inflammation, a biological age test result, your VO2max, your grip strength, or your lipids. You can have very low inflammation, but a very bad VO2max and vice versa. Optimal health is a good balance in all areas of health and blood work. Instead of having only amazing lipids but bad incidence, resistivity, and high inflammation, it's better to have all the blood markers in a decent and healthy spot. A well balanced blood work is better than having only single markers in the optimal range and others in a bad range. You achieve that by also embracing a well balanced lifestyle. Instead of being only super fit, you also need to sleep well, eat a decent diet, manage your stress, and have good mental health. It all comes down to balance. Blood tests should be only done so you know what you need to focus on. If you're going to measure something such as your cholesterol or homocysteine, then also be willing to change your lifestyle to improve those markers when you get the results. Just testing but not doing anything is a waste of money. Humans are creatures of habit. We eat in a certain way because we're used to it, and our taste buds have made us prefer that food. We follow our routines because it feels less effortful to our brain, and changing habits requires more effort. However, if you commit to actually changing your lifestyle based on your blood work results, you will eventually get used to it and you'll be happy that you made a change because you will be lowering your overall risk of all cause mortality. Alright. There you have it. As a final tip, I would say that don't go crazy with your blood work. I've seen a lot of people spend a ton of money on taking tests and taking blood work, but they skip exercise and they don't eat a good diet or they don't sleep even. So what's the point? Have your health fundamentals checked. Make sure you exercise regularly. Make sure you're not all right. Make sure you sleep enough. Because just focusing on improving these things, you can expect your blood work to also improve. Do the blood work after you've covered the bare essentials. Blood tests are useful to know what specific areas you should focus on. But if you have bad sleep and you're ten kilos overweight, then you already know the most important things you need to focus on. Fixing your sleep and losing the weight. If you want to know how to get yourself from average health to top 1% health, then check out my video showing you how next.