I've tested hundreds of supplements to find out what actually works. Along the way, I also discovered the ones that didn't work for me. No noticeable effects on my blood work or fitness. In this video, I'm going to share the supplements that had zero effects on me. It doesn't mean that these supplements don't work. Some of them actually have evidence that they do work in clinical trials, but for me, they didn't move the needle. The first supplement is a popular one, taurine. Don't get me wrong. Taurine has a tremendous amount of research supporting its benefits for metabolic health such as blood pressure, insulin sensitivity, and lipids. It's just that personally, I saw no effects from taurine on my metabolic health markers probably because my blood work was already optimized to begin with and I have excellent metabolic health. There are also studies on taurine improving exercise performance, specifically endurance, vr max, and strength. Now this is where I did notice some improvements. The biggest effect I see is in explosiveness and speed and power. It's similar to creatine. I have a bigger gas tank and I can do a few more reps, but the effects aren't as big as for creatine. Overall, taurine is great and it is backed up by evidence for supporting metabolic health and exercise performance. I just personally didn't see effects on my metabolic health, but it's proven to work for people who have poor metabolic health. The next supplement is SIRT six activator, which is made from a seaweed that's supposed to activate a sirtuin called SIRT six. SIRT six is the only sirtuin seen to extend lifespan in animals, and it does so through DNA repair, energy homeostasis, NAD synthesis, and antioxidant defense. However, there aren't any human clinical trials on Sert six, and I personally didn't notice any effects when I was taking it even for over a year. Now this doesn't mean it has no benefits. We just don't know because it hasn't been researched that much. And I obviously can't tell if it is going to extend my lifespan in fifty years. I personally didn't feel any difference in terms of DNA repair or any desynthesis or anything like that. That's probably because I'm already very healthy. I have virtually zero inflammation, and I have high NAD levels to begin with because I'm young and I have a healthy lifestyle. So some unhealthier individuals might notice a difference. The next supplement is CoQ ten. CoQ ten is an enzyme involved in mitochondrial energy production, and it's used to supplement for fatigue and heart failure. There is pretty compelling evidence for reducing fatigue and reducing mortality in heart failure patients. There's also evidence that CoQ ten supplementation reduces muscle damage from exercise. Again, I didn't notice effects because I don't have any energy problems. I don't have poorly working mitochondria, and I don't have heart failure. I'm also so used to exercising that I don't notice muscle soreness either unless I take a break from the exercise for a few weeks. CoQ10 is worthwhile for people who have chronic fatigue, they have some mitochondrial issues, or they have poor metabolic health. There is research CoQ10 increases the o two max and anaerobic performance, so it is a worthwhile supplement in that regard. Next up is methylene blue, which isn't a supplement, but it is available over the counter, and it is used in medicine for certain medical conditions. I took methylene blue because a lot of people report that it changed their life. It unlocked their brain, increased their energy, and reversed their age. When I took it for several weeks, I noticed no effects. Maybe I need a larger dose, but maybe my mitochondria are already working optimally and I don't need it. You see, methylene blue is an alternative electron donor, and it bypasses the mitochondrial complex one and complex three, which helps the mitochondria to produce energy during mitochondrial dysfunction when one of the complexes is broken. I would be willing to take methadine blue when I am experiencing some sort of energy stress or mitochondrial dysfunction such as during long haul flights or if I got like an x-ray or something like that. But I'm not gonna take it every day because I don't notice any effects. And I don't think it's reasonable for me to try to triple or quadruple my dose just to find an effect. Now TMG is something that worked very well for me. When I took two grams of TMG, I dropped my homocysteine level slightly. However, increasing my TMG dose from two grams to four grams had no additional effects on reducing homocysteine, which is fine. There are also some studies showing that TMG might support muscle growth or strength development, but in my opinion, the evidence for that is very conflicting and not clear. That's why I can't say whether or not TMG is going to support body composition and muscle. So TMG worked great for reducing homocysteine, but I I don't know if it improved my muscle mass or muscle strength. I did notice some improvements in my muscle mass as shown by DXA scan throughout this period, but it might have been also something else because the studies about TMG and muscle growth are kind of mixed. So I don't know. But let's say the number one reason I take TMG isn't the muscle mass anyway. It's for the homocysteine. There are also some general antioxidants and multivitamin supplements that I don't notice an effect from. Vitamin e and a multivitamin. Interestingly, I do notice an effect from vitamin c. For NAC, there is research that it helps with muscle strength if you take it before exercise, but I haven't tested it that much and I don't notice a reduction in inflammation from NAC because my inflammation is already low. So there we have it. These are the supplements I noticed no effects from or I couldn't tell if they were working or not. It doesn't mean that these supplements don't work. Taurine, Dmg, Cocuten, NAC, vitamin c, they all have been shown to have some benefits. My challenge for you is to go through your supplement stack and think whether or not it's actually working or if it's a waste of money. Is there any human clinical evidence for this supplement? If not, then you can fall victim to placebo or good marketing. How do you feel when taking the supplement? Do you notice a significant effect on your mood, energy, sleep, metabolism, or exercise performance? If yes, then it might have an effect, but be careful with not falling victim to placebo due to marketing. Let me help you with some supplements that have been proven to work based on human studies. Check out my video about the top 15 supplements next.