You give your mitochondria everything they need to function normally and taurine is a boost, you're gonna eat through those lipids, and you're gonna reduce your dyslipidemia significantly, astaxanthin. And the number of human studies and, the number of things that we have learned about it has just skyrocketed. Mhmm. And I used to think it was amazing. Now it's, like, uber amazing. Doctor Sandra, welcome back to the show. It is a pleasure to be here. Thanks for having me. We decided to talk about supplements this time, which is a very, like, you know, popular topic as well. And you've, talked a lot about different supplements and, with your own, like, rating system for, like, grading their effectiveness or, potential for health. So, maybe we can just start off giving an overview of what does that, like, system, look like and how does it work? No. So absolutely. So it starts out with the idea, and I may sound repetitive here, but I will repeat myself. I believe in what I call the seven tenants of aging. And this is how I sort of organize cellular dysfunction. And then the numerical rating system is based on how well supplements or adjuvants do within those categories. So, sort of in a moderately small nutshell, 10 at one has to do with DNA alterations. So this is epigenetics. This is telomere, shortening. And then recently, I have added, sort of a topic or subtopic of heterochromatin distribution. Because at the age, our chromatin, the heterochromatin versus euchromatin populations sort of change. And the less heterochromatin you have, sort of the worse off you are. So that's sort of, like, new and different as the years have progressed. Mhmm. Tenant two is mitochondrial failure, and And I think your mitochondria age in about seven ish different ways depending on how you count them. And this is anything from failure of your mitochondrial, transport chain with all the different subunits sort of coming and going with NAD deficiency, with mitochondrial permeability transition pore failure, sirtuin three deficiency, the diff you know, something there's some issues with fission infusion and mitochondrial biogenesis sort of etcetera. So that's two. Three is pathways. And here are the classic seven sirtuin pathways, AMP Kinase, and, of course, mTOR. And what I've also added in this category of late is the idea that circadian rhythms should be in the pathway category. Mhmm. And this is because there are various distinct molecular mechanisms as to why you sleep and why you wake up. They fail as you get older. We can address them, so, therefore, I sort of put that in this category. Tenant four remains quality control. That is DNA repair mechanisms, cardiostasis, and, of course, autophagy. Five is your immune system that becomes your inflammatory system over time. Six is individual cell needs, which has to do with keeping your stem cells nice and happy, eradicating your senescent cells, and the idea that a red cell is different than a brain cell, etcetera. And then the last category is waste management, which is mostly glycation issues as well as lipo fusion accumulation. Mhmm. So, again, in a medium sized nutshell, that's how I consider aging. And the way the rating system works is that if an agent, has evidence in these categories, it gets either a zero, one, two, or three. There's evidence that it does absolutely nothing, it gets a zero. If there's evidence in test tubes or cultures, it gets a one. Evidence in nonhuman, mammal models, which are usually rodents, it gets a two. Solid evidence in humans, then it gets a three. Since all of my agents have a three digit writing number. That's exactly what they do and what we know. So the best, most powerful magic pill would be that it has three in all seven of the tenants. That would be miraculous. And some and some of them actually, there there are some things that they they get kind of close. Yeah. Absolutely. What are some examples of this? Well, so for example, metformin does Mhmm. A lot. I think that people have overdone it with dosage, and then you start seeing unfortunate side effects in terms of, like, hippocampal turnover. But, metformin is extremely powerful. NAD precursors don't do something in every category, but they do a lot in several categories. They're very potent. And the other thing that we're realizing is that it's it's I can't give threes to research that hasn't been done yet. So for agents that don't have a lot of financial backing, human studies are very expensive. So just because we don't know that it does something humans, we can sort of extrapolate that it probably does. So example, fisetin gets twos in almost every category, but it doesn't have any good threes yet because we just haven't looked. But I think that ultimately, a lot of these numbers will go up. Mhmm. And I guess my big example here is I recently I started revisiting a lot of the agents that I hadn't looked at for years. The first one since I started alphabetically was astaxanthin. And the number of human studies and, the number of things that we have learned about it has just skyrocketed. And I used to think it was amazing, and now it's, like, uber amazing. Mhmm. Yeah. I've seen also, like, you know, the last year or the year before was, like, the life extension study. They found an extended lifespan. And, yeah, there's also this clinical trials with inflammation and, skin health and, yeah, other other, like, benefits as well. Oh, yep. That's amazing. Like, what I did not realize, and I cut probably because we didn't know it, that when you eat astaxanthin, it goes into, your your your system. But it travels around your body in LDLs and HDLs. Right? And it prevents the oxidation of those vesicles, essentially. And turns out that, like, a standard LDL, it's not great for you, but it's not really gonna kill you. But once it's oxidized, that's when a macrophage comes along, sort of takes it in, becomes a foam cell, which then becomes the beginning of vascular sclerosis and plaque. So if you can avoid the oxidation of those molecules, you can theoretically reduce all relative risk of atherosclerosis, and that was not known when I became obsessed with astaxanthin. Now I think any everyone should just be on this for avoidance of, you know, cardiovascular disease. Mhmm. Yeah. I'm a huge fan of astaxanthin as well. Including the other correct carotenoids, actually, I've learned a lot more about recently about, like, lutein, zeaxanthin, and lycopene, and those things. They also have quite, quite a lot of, like, for for eye health, mostly, that help with eye health. Maybe some information as well, but predominantly like, eye health. Yeah. No. Absolutely. And it just has to do with the fact that they all have this very long polar chain. Well, I I take it back. Astaxanthin specifically has a long chain of of carbons, which is, polar, and then the ends are sort of nonpolar. Right? Polar, nonpolar, polar. Yeah. Both all all areas, all two pieces or three pieces, depending on how you look at it, suck up free radicals and electrons. But what's cool about their their mechanism is that they sit in membranes. Right? So all the xanthids do it, including, you know, the ones that you referred to. And that's why it's so potent because they go to the membranes in the retina and they suck up these free radicals and they improve vision or at least they decrease the damage to vision. So it's cool. Right. What about, like, some other very, like, I guess, powerful molecules that have a lot of threes? Oh, gosh. That is a really hard question to answer. Creatine. I don't know if if you've, covered it. Honestly, I've not read rated creatine. It's great for your muscle, but it has not been rated yet. It is on the list of things to be rated. Mhmm. Threes. You asked that in a very strange I the answer is I can't tell you right off hand. But just From from the website, there's, like, nicotinamide, curcumin. Oh, it was actually, this is perfect. You tell me the agent, and I can see what they do. That's a much better method. So so NAD, of course, is utterly amazing. And that's been all over the news lately. And the question is what type of precursor should we be using? I read when I did the original rating system, it was pretty much only NR. The irony is that we're sort of getting back to that. But it did incredibly, really well with threes because, yes, there was money in it so we could do human studies. And what NAD precursors do, obviously, is they become NAD. And this is responsible for all three aspects of energy production and that it sits in your electron transport chain. It sits in the matrix of your mitochondria for the Krebs cycle, and it also is involved in glycolysis. So going from glucose to usable pieces and parts that go then feed into the mitochondria to make energy. But the other thing that NAD is is needed for is 500 reactions whereby we actually take the molecule apart and use it as a cofactor. The two important ones are the sirtuins. So every sirtuin, you need, NAD's cofactor, and then, all of the PARPs. PARP one, especially, which is DNA, repair. So without NAD, you don't have a whole lot of, DNA repair, meaning you're more likely to get cancer or cell death apoptosis. Alternatively, if you don't have NAD for sirtuins, you're gonna lose cellular homeostasis. So there's an absolute a lot of money got dumped into NAD research, which is why it's threes, and we know that it is absolutely critical. Once upon a time, there was only nicotinamide riboside. Now there's nicotinamide mononucleotide, although although that's getting pulled from the market because they're turning it into a drug, which I think is absurd, but it is what it is. You can also inject straight up NAD, which is quite nice. What and it it all has to do the reason all of this sort of goes on is that there's no actual NAD receptor with the exception of neurons. So if you inject NAD into the system, it has to be converted into something else to get into cells with the exception of neurons, which is why IV NAD, the only thing that I think is really good for is actually neurological issues. Everything else should be a precursor because too much in the like, delivered in an IV system could actually be sort of toxic. But NAD, anyone over the age of 40, and you're not even there yet, should be on some sort of, NAD supplementation. Right. So, yeah, like, either n r, n m n, or even, like, nicotinamide would work? Yeah. Any any any of the b three vitamins can theoretically do it. A lot of them just have side effects that are sort of miserable, but, yes, absolutely. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices which are the bond charge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes. They do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin anti aging, hormone optimization, pain management, and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes. Especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the Bond Charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most rheumatic turbidizers don't have the right wavelengths of light, which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Boncharge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research. And they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code SIIM, s I I m, for a 15% discount. Next one, one of my favorite supplements is a glycine, which I like a lot. What do you think about glycine? Well, I'm actually just very curious. So it's just a Bethel donor. So what what do you like so much about glycine? Well, it, first of all, it's like for collagen turnover required, and supports collagen synthesis. Then you have, gulathione and creatine synthesis, helps with sleep, helps with blood sugar, regulates autophagy, might help with, like, methionine restriction based on animal studies. And there are, like, two years ago, I think something that was some human trials with glycine and NAC, so GLINAC, that showed quite interesting effects on, like, gait speed, grip strength, some, you know, biomarkers as well, and mitochondrial function and inflammation and those kind of things. So, yeah. Yeah. If I were to use the same kind of system, then it's gonna have a few threes. Yep. A lot of twos. Well, what I think is interesting is sort of about it's it's just it's an amino acid, and it's a very basic amino acid. So it's a building block for a lot of these things. And then the question is is and and I ask this myself all the time. Like, if if if we were glycine deficient and you put it back, of course, it's going to help. Does extra do more? And the answer is in some categories, it does, and in some categories, it does not. But I you're right. I do like glycine. It has not been rated. It's another one of these promise there's hundreds of these things on my list to do. Yeah. Yes. I usually recommend it as a methylating agent, but it does all of those wonderful wonderful things, in addition. Speaking of the methyl donors, like, with, these NAD boosters, like in our day, it's often said that you need to take, like, an methyl donor alongside to prevent, depleting the methyl donors. Do you think that's, like, actual actually warranted or not? So it depends on how much of a precursor you take. Mhmm. So what's really interesting. So if so if you take and some sort of precursor and you get a high level of NAD, and that gets metabolized and you end up with NAM, which is just the straight up nicotinamide, that molecule loves to be methylated. So if you have a large quantity of that in any one given cell, it's gonna suck up all of your methyl donors. Thus, you're gonna negatively affect all the epigenetics and other places that you need your methyl donors. Therefore, people that are on a lot of NAD most definitively need some sort of methylation support. Mhmm. On the other hand, if you just use a little bit or you are younger, you don't need it. Right. Gotcha. Because you have, like, more, I guess, an entity baseline? Yeah. You don't start becoming I mean, statistically speaking. And and and granted, you know, it's hard to measure your levels, and people are starting to do so, but it's pretty hard. But statistically speaking, you're gonna start really needing it by the time you are 40 or if you also have a lot of systemic pathology because inflammatory processes require a lot of energy for repair and that sort of thing. But for most normal people under the age of 40, you're not very NAD deficient, therefore adding too much will make you toxic because NAM is toxic with feedback loops and sex up the methyl groups. Gotcha. Too much of anything, yeah, can be harmful. Yeah. Curcumin was another one on on your list. Oh, I love curcumin. So here here's my my my thirty second speech. Because everyone always says, I eat turmeric. And I always say, that's nice. It tastes cool. Right? But, like, one to 5% of turmeric is actually curcumin. Curcumin by itself has terrible bioavailability. Absolutely terrible. So for the last fifteen years, there's been the ever escalating war of who can make it more bioavailable. And the first stage is they added pepper. Pepper decreases the, the liver's ability to digest it so it lasts a little bit long longer. They've tried putting it with various things. My favorite is a company called Rev Genetics, whereby it's in a nanomysial. When you take the capsule or you look at the capsule, it looks like encapsulated goo. And in fact, you can open it and play with it. It's pretty runny and gross and squishy, but it's incredibly effective. And they know this. So they advertise on the bottle. It's called two seventy seven x. So it is 277 times as bioavailable as standard curcumin. Mhmm. It people just do incredibly well. It is a polyphenol, so it's, the epigenetic modifier. It is an anti inflammatory. It is just it just has amazing qualities. It's one of the few things that reduces lipo fusion accumulation. I just I love it. I I put everyone on curcumin. Yeah. So it has actually had some human trials as well. Inflammation is the biggest one I've seen. Oh, yeah. Absolutely. And and and granted, I have not looked at that now in several years, so it's going to get revamped. I'm rewriting a lot of my previous books, only because there's so much more research. So it it will get relooked at, but I can guarantee you there's gotta be a lot of human evidence because we use it in cancer research. We use it for anyone that has any sort of arthritis, rheumatoid, osteoarthritis. It is just a tremendous, tremendous chemical. So so so right. So anything that activates n r f two, and a lot of the polyphenols do that. It's amazing. Right? Because that then increases glutathione, catalase, and all the, superoxide dismutases, which is actually sort of interesting. So many people are on straight up glutathione, and I'm concerned that it's a negative feedback feedback loop to the n r f two. So you're not gonna then be making catalase in in your SODs. So no no not good to take straight up glutathione? So the the answer is, in my opinion, you either take the precursor, which is NAC, or you don't take glutathione every day. You just take it as a big bolus once a month or once a week, depending on who you are and what your liver is doing. Mhmm. But the, so the, but the inflammatory pathways, which are different, it's mostly the, NK alpha system. Is that right? Sorry. My brain scrambled today. Anyway, the anti by turning off the, Nuclear factor kappa b or something. Yes. Thank you. My brain is off today. But by turning that off, you're turning off the the cytokines that cause most of the inflammation. So it's, one a, six, and a variety of other ones. Well, the opposite, of course, is ten and seventeen. We want those. Okay. What what about, like, ginger as well? It's kinda similar to curcumin in a lot of ways. It is. It's similar, and it and it's the same sort of thing. Ginger straight up, just the the molecules are just not that prevalent, so you need to take actually the, isolated molecules in bulk or with with higher bioavailability. No. Ginger's great. It does a few other things as well. It's molecularly related, not identical, not as good. Gotcha. It I I've seen a few clinical trials with that, weight loss surprisingly helps with weight loss and, waist circumference. Well, that's that's because it's also a GLP agonist. Right. Ginger. Yeah. The ginger side a and b, I think, are the molecules that do it. It's not potent, but it does work. Yeah. Yeah. This is, maybe very small amount, compared to GLP one agonist. Yeah. But that may be something that people, when they come off of their injections, they may want to continue on a less intensive oral therapy where you just sort of get reminded not to eat as much and you still, you get some of the benefits without all of the downsides. Yeah. And I guess, you know, if you're just, you know, not clinically obese, or you're seriously overweight, then you might use it to to lose a few extra kilograms or something. Yeah. Yeah. And I will tell you a lot of people do that, but not just ginger. There are there are a few things that do it. Like, anyway, I'm creating a supplement product with some folks with all of the, the natural GLPs. So I'm sort of not at liberty to discuss exactly what they are. But there are some really good ones out there, and I think that's going to be a viable alternative, to the, the, you know, injection system. Yeah. If you were to, like, try to grade the Ozempic and GLP-one themselves, you know, because obviously they work partially through calorie restriction, but there's also some other, like, effects on the on the GLP one itself that helps with the blood sugar and, the other hip benefits. So, like, yeah, I guess if you were to try to put any, like, number on those things, what would it be? The the answer is is I don't know. I'd have to sit there and read clinical studies. For example, what would it do to your telomeres? Probably nothing. What would it do to your epigenetics? It might have some effect. It's not gonna change your heterochromatin distribution. Mhmm. Biotrondria hard to say pathways would probably activate your AMP kinase pathway. Right? Because it's it's reducing your caloric load. Anything that's a partial AMP kinase activator is also a partial mTOR activator, so that might have some degree of activity. It would probably act a bit as an anti inflammatory because you're lowering some of the cytokines that's coming from the adipose tissue. So over the course of time, that would be something. Individual cells is not gonna do a whole lot. Waste management would actually be it's gonna lower glucose levels. That would be useful. So we don't have a mixed score. Yeah. Like I said, the Most people are talking about systems right now and not cell based. Yeah. So it's gonna be hard to say. The other thing that's happening is we keep going through different generations of these things, and they all seem to have slightly different profiles. Mhmm. So when you just sort of say, okay, well, what is a, you know, a GLP going to do? It's gonna depend on which one it is or what combination we have. One really, I guess, interesting, molecule as well as melatonin, which, you know, does have quite powerful anti inflammatory effects, antioxidant effects. How would you, like, rate melatonin? Oh, gosh. I have rated it. I don't remember what the exact number is, but you are spot on. It is amazing for your mitochondria. Amazing for your mitochondria. In fact, I went to a conference once, and a gentleman was recommending, like, two hundred, milligrams, a night. And I'm like, that's kinda silly. So I made it up to two No. I made it up to 20. I can't push beyond 20 ones, and then I was an absolute zombie. But, no, melatonin is absolutely fantastic. Again, nothing for your DNA to recall this. Mitochondria, obviously, it scored a three. Pathway's probably not. Inflammation, probably it's scored because it it does have some anti inflammatory properties. Probably nothing for repair. Cells that actually I think that actually there's some evidence that helps your bone cells. And then waste management, I don't recall. Maybe some slight glucose lowering, but probably not a lot. But it definitely had some threes because we have a lot of human studies with melatonin. Yeah. Yeah. Actually interesting to see, like, I've seen ten milligrams helps with, like, lipids and inflammation. But, yeah, like you said, if if I personally have taken, like, yeah, ten milligrams. I was also waking up quite groggy and like a zombie a little bit for a few hours. And, yeah, I've seen actually, like, on Amazon on on The US, Amazon only, I've seen, like, a hundred milligram doses. Yeah. Yeah. Sound quite a lot. You know, and I don't really quite understand. So in The UK, you can't even get melatonin, but that is baffling to me. Absolutely. I don't understand why they do that. But Yeah. That's kinda interesting. I have a lot of UK clients, and I recommend it. And, they're like, yeah, we can't get it. It's like saying we can't get a prenatal vitamin. It just seems absurd. But anyway Right. Moving on maybe with, like, carnosine of, I remember that was one of your I figured Oh, I love carnosine. I can't wait to go back and sort of revisit it. But so carnosine, I chose to put in the panacea because, it's simple, safe transglycosylating agent. And what is what does that mean? So when sugars and you obviously know all this. I'll just sort of repeat it for your listeners. So when reducing sugars, which are mostly glucose and fructose, combine in an oxidative environment, they break up into pieces and they create something called AGEs, which are advanced glycation end products. AGEs are incredibly inflammatory, which is bad. They land on tissues, and they cause tissue destruction, just absolutely horrible things. But becoming, of a glucose molecule breaking down and becoming an AGE is actually a six non enzymatic step process. And the first steps are reversible, and the second half of the steps are not reversible. So what I always like to say is in the first half of their relationship, this glucose and this protein, they're they're not committed to each other. It's slightly romantic, but they're not committed. And if you take a more attractive molecule and you introduce it into the system, you can take the glucose away. Right? Once they're once once they're married and and they're stuck together, you're sort of hosed. Nothing's gonna happen. You're stuck with an AGE. But anyway so the first half of this process, if you introduce a more, you know, better molecule, the glucose will jump ship onto that molecule, and then you excrete it. And that's what transglycosylating agents are. And there's several. Karnosine is the most benign, safe, easy to get, easy to produce molecule, which is why I chose to put that in the panacea. Mhmm. Other things include, like, hydrolysine. It's one of my favorite drugs. Hydrolysine is used it's a drug that used for emergency high blood pressure. So if you showed up at the emergency room and your pressure was, like, you know, 200 over a 100, they'd be like, oh my god. Hydrolysine. So I can't really tell people to say hydrolysine because it will crump out your blood pressure. On the other hand, the hydrazine molecule is an amazing transglycosylating agent. That's my best example. And there's there's several of them that fall into that category. But the easiest is carnosine. Gotcha. Other really nice thing about carnosine is it is a muscle buffer. So when you consume it, it goes into your muscles, which is, if you eat chicken and turkey, there tends to be a lot of carnosine in it in it as well because it lives in their in their muscle, and it buffers the acid. So if you're a big exerciser or you're getting back into exercising and you get that burn when you exercise and you, like, ache the next day, this essentially gets rid of that. So people love this. Okay. Also, this is why carnosine is so amazing. The other two other interesting factoids is that so you can take it as a pill. So it gets all over your body, and it work helps to do all of these things I've mentioned. But you can also use it as eye drops. And they're just NAC eye drops. They're over the counter, and it actually can lift some of the glucose off of your lens and actually start to decrease cataracts and presbyopia. So I am obsessed with these with these eye drops. This whole eye drop thing now, which is kind of kind of fun. We could talk about that in a minute if you want. Okay. The other kind of thing that you need to know about carnosine is because it is, you everyone has it in their regular bodies. Right? It is, an endogenous dipeptide. Men have more than women. Young people have more than old people. So as you are a woman and you are aging, like, you're you're in the worst category possible. But because it is a naturally occurring agent, we have enzymes to get rid of it. So there's an enzyme called carnosine ace, and it eats up carnosine. So the more carnosine you take as a supplement, the more you rev up the enzyme to get rid of it. And then you've got this escalating game of eat it, break it down, eat it, break it down. So for supplements that are actual supplements, meaning, like, you have it in your body, I recommend cycling those to allow your regular enzymes to sort of go back to normal, and then you can scratch again. Because otherwise, at some point, you're taking a standard dose and it's not gonna do squat for you because you just get rid of it instantaneously. Oh, interesting. Yeah. How would like I've heard that there's not, like, very bioavailable in of itself. So the interesting thing about bioavailability is it sort of depends on you can always increase the dose number one. Mhmm. Right? Or you can microencapsulate it. You can do this. You can do that. I I will tell you that regular carnosine, the numbers probably don't tell the whole story. Because I can tell you that when I personally take one capsule, which is depending on the brand, is either four hundred to five hundred milligrams, I don't feel anything. That's great. If I screw up and I have done this and I take two, your body is just on pins and needles, that burning weird carnosine flash for, like, five, ten minutes. And you go, oh, that's bioavailable. I feel that. So I guarantee you that it's getting into your body. Yeah. Because, like, if you if you take beta alanine, right, then your body makes carnosine Yep. If you're not mistaken. So that's one of one other, like, alternative. Mhmm. Yep. You can get that. And it also gives it a tingle then. Yep. So depending on so young people do better with the individual agents. So twenties and thirties, absolutely take the components. If you are old, you don't do that as well. So take the carnosine. EKG, so alpha ketoglutarate, that's, talked a lot about as well, and it's, you know, has some interesting animal research about life's lifespan. What do you think about EKG? I love it. I love it. It supports your brain. It supports every cell that uses glutamate, which is in your mitochondria. Very, very, very useful. I have found that the best, use for it is actually with people that have GI dysfunction. I have found that people with a leaky gut or some sort of possible leaky gut, it just really, really, really helps them. The question is always, however, so if there's alpha ketoglutarate, it's one of those things that has to be complex to something. So there's calcium, alpha glu or, glu or, gluerate, and then there's also arginine, ketoglutarate. And and for older people, I always get tell them to take the arginine because then that's helpful as well. It sort of serves as a low key vasodilator. Gotcha. But I'm a big fan of ketoglutarate. Which, like, type? So, like, there's, you know, different you can attach it to different things like calcium, arginine. Do you think any one of those is better or not? So it depends on who you are. Right? So if if you are old and you have a high calcium score, don't take extra calcium. So you don't want it. Right? On the other hand, if you have a calcium deficiency, which a lot of women do, then that's important. I mostly deal with older people, and we worry about, like, vasoreactivity and etcetera. And it's it's it's arginine is very useful as a low grade vasodilator. So I like I tell most of my clients to go with the arginine. Gotcha. Yeah. I also tend to be more careful with the calcium because, yeah, there's, like, the studies, like, large doses of calcium can, yeah, be problematic for heart disease risk. No. It it absolutely is. And I and I think that it's really interesting. I've lately become sort of obsessed with low grade metal toxicities, iron, calcium, copper, because what's especially especially especially iron. What happens, and it's really interesting, is your body absorbs it into your intestinal cells, your enterocytes. And your and those cells decide, if I have enough, I'm just gonna, like, get rid of that cell. And if they don't, they absorb it. Right? But once iron is in your body, other than hemorrhage, there's no way to get rid of it. Right? So young women that are menstruating sort of lose blood, so you're losing iron. Men obviously don't do this, and older women don't do it. So all the iron that you're bringing in is stuck there. Right? And so what does it do? Like, you need some. Right? You need some to make red cells and to sort of run, you know, various, reactions around your body. But unfortunately, iron, takes part in the fenton reaction in terms of oxidative stress. So the more iron you have, the worse oxidative stress you have, the more free radicals, etcetera, etcetera Yeah. The worse off you are. So there's no way to sort of clear this stuff out other than natural chelators. I mean, there's some, like, big ass chelators that you can use for drugs, but they're not gonna give it to you, and it's ridiculously expensive unless you're dying of something. Yeah. So I've been trying to focus on chelating or trying to chelate or reduce the intake of these agents as much as possible. And it turns out back to our friend astaxanthin. Uh-huh. It turns out that every molecule of astaxanthin can theoretically clamp on to two molecules based on the two rings of of a a plus two metal. That's interesting. Yeah. So so I have a a client that has some high mercury levels, and we're gonna try to reduce it with astaxanthin, see if that works. Interesting. Yeah. And, the excess iron also, like, drives this lipophosphine that you mentioned earlier, one of the, like It does. Things that accumulates. Yeah. It does. Because it it's a absolutely. So because the body can't get rid of it, it stashes it in the back of the cell. It causes things to sort of become globs that are non digestible. Yeah. So it just sits in the back of cells and you get lipo fusion accumulation. And especially in nerve cells and brain cells as you get older, that is a huge problem in terms of taking up space and not being gonna have cognitive ability. So, you know, all of these people that take extra iron, I think, oh my god. That I don't think that's a great unless you're truly deficient. I just don't think that's a great idea. I'm also weary of now everyone's taking copper tripeptides. I'm actually really concerned with all the extra copper going into people because it it it it as well, you know, it's a plus two charge. It can theoretically cause issues. Like topical as well or just oral? Well, anything that you put on your body is going to go into your body theoretically. Right? Like, if you think that some sort of topical copper is going to affect your body in a positive way, it has to get into your body. What about, like, another popular one is, taurine? Like, it's, become Oh, I love taurine. Tor so taurine is fantastic. Taurine is amazing for your mitochondria. Truly, truly, truly amazing. I can't say I don't remember the numbering system, but I became infatuated with taurine a couple years ago. It's absolutely on anyone that needs a mitochondrial program, needs a boost. Taurine is it. Absolutely. I wish I had more details, like, just in the top of my tongue, but I don't. But I'm absolutely pro touring if there was a voting system. Yeah. There are, like, exercise performance benefits slight slightly. And, with human clinical trials, you have, like, metabolic syndrome, like, cholesterol, blood pressure, inflammation, and, those kind of things. So, yeah, it has, like, a pretty good there's a round of effects in both the animal studies plus, human studies. I think most of it just relates to upregulation of mitochondrial function, if my memory serves me correctly. So what's interesting about mitochondria is mitochondria decide, am I gonna use glucose, or am I gonna use lipids as an energy source? Depending on the sirtuin input, depending on sort of what your metabolism is, like, it changes over over time. Right? Which is one of the reasons that older people have cholesterol issues or lipid issues, lipid dyscrasias, because they're not utilizing it the way they used to because their mitochondria can't. So if you upgrade your your sirtuins, you up regulate your PCG one alpha, if you give your mitochondria everything they need to function normally and taurine is a boost, you're gonna eat through those lipids and you're gonna reduce your, your dyslipidemia significantly. Yeah. What do you think about, like, some of these supplements that I guess, like, you're targeting multiple hallmarks of aging as well as, like, the selling point. So, like, do you think that's a smart idea, or, are there some limitations with that? So that's two questions, actually. So the hallmarks of aging is this giant laundry list of non organized thoughts. And it's a great list, but it keeps growing, and it's not it's not parallel. Like, it'll have, like, your your microbiome in one corner, collagen production over here, telomeres over here. Like, it's not organized. So it's like a bingo card as far as I'm concerned. Right? Why I like my system because it's one two three four five six seven with subcategories. So I could say, uh-huh. And and they're all sort of interrelated. Right? We know that oxidized oxidative stress drives inflammation, that drives this, that drives that. So if you look at a true sort of Venn diagram of all of these things, they're I mean, they're gonna be, like, monstrously overlapping. Mhmm. But we try to separate them just for the conversation. Right? So it would not be unusual for one agent to do many things in many many categories because they are all interrelated. Right? And you never would take one thing to do one well, that's not true. Sometimes you would take one thing to do one thing. But in general, your body doesn't work that way. Just doesn't. So many things will do things in many categories, just maybe not as well. And then there's a few specializers. Right? Like, t a 65, it pretty much only takes care of your of your telomeres. It doesn't do a whole lot of anything else. But then other things have, like, you know, across the board, they're just horribly beneficial. Mhmm. So I don't think the system it's not it doesn't work one to one, but it certainly doesn't always work one to many. It's a mixture. Maybe we can maybe take a, turn to, like, the, disappointment supplements. Like, what are, like, some zeros that, have mostly zeros? Oh, god. There's so many I just I just it's funny. I read them. I'm yeah. I'm so utterly disappointed. Like, the one people used to take, to build up their is it chondroitin? Chondroton sulfate to build up the cartilage in their knees. That is the most worthless thing I have ever seen in my life. Like, pointless. Absolutely flipping pointless. So I I take people off of that. Trying to think what I mean, there's there's a ton of them. I get people's lists all the time, and you just go, they're not so good. What about resveratrol? I love resveratrol. So just just because, Sinclair's a little nutty so resveratrol is a very potent polyphenol. It really does activate sirtuins. And the way you have to look at this is you can't just look at one person's study. Right? If one study says it, you go, that's interesting. If seven studies go, you know, well, that's pretty decent. If if, like, a 100 studies demonstrates that an agent does x, it probably does it. Right? So there's absolute evidence that resveratrol upregulates sirtuin one and by default probably upregulates some of the other sirtuins as well. The key here is that you need NAD as a cofactor. So sometimes when you don't have enough NAD, resveratrol is not going to do anything. Right? So you have to sort of look at the conditions in each study. What are they looking for? What exactly are they measuring? But I'm a believer in resveratrol. It also has to be bioavailable. A lot of it's not. I guess, yeah, like, the problem with the resveratrol is the the human studies have been kind of disappointing in that sense. Well, the other thing is that people take one agent and they they throw it against a wall of, like, incredibly horrible people. You know, type four diabetics. I'm making that up. You know, horrible diabetics, massive, you know, obesity, you know, cholesterol out the wazoo bee. These people are close to death. And they send them, like, one agent with a conservative dose. Nothing's going to happen. Nothing. Because that's common sense. There is no magical cure. Things take combinations. So for that person, you need to, yeah, fix their lipids, fix their oxidative stress levels, activate their sirtuins. I mean, there's so many things. And, yeah, if you put a combination of things together, you will absolutely see results. One thing is never going to fix all of those things. Right. Yeah. I think with the rosaryoterol, you had, like, one one mouse study where it and it, like, extended the lifespan in these, super obese mice who were fed, like, 60% coconut oil diet. And, in humans, you have, like, some clinical trials that in obese patients, it does, like, help with some lipids and, I guess, and, like, blood sugar as well. So it's like, you know, these people aren't, like, eating 60% coconut or that, but it's kind of similar that the standard American diet is similar to this very high fattening, diet, and they're, you know, overweight and obese. So I guess, at least my interpretation of the literature is that Brazilians would actually work only in people who have this obesogenic diet and, dyslipiaemia. I so I would back up and and say you have to redefine your endpoint. Right? When you say work, what exactly do you mean by work? Right? If you if you're looking for a weight loss, that's one thing. If you're looking for a change in their lipids, that's another thing. What you really wanna be looking at is their sirtuin levels. Mhmm. Right? That's what you wanna be looking at because resveratrol is a sirtuin activator. Right? No one does. But very few people do this. But this is what you have to do. Right? You need to measure one, three, and six and see actually what it does. Because then by default, what are sirtuins do? Well, they help you sleep better. They don't measure that. No one no one counts that. It decreases cancer risk, but that's not what they're measuring. Right? You have to know what your outcome is. You have to, like, you have to define the goals of your study, I think, more appropriate to the agent and not just something that's readily measurable. What is overrated? That's a good question. Problem is I never keep track of the ones that are overrated because I sort of toss them. I don't know. Multivitamin or something. Oh, I love multivitamins. And I actually tell people that they should be on, prenatal vitamins because you are making new cells every day. And by the time you're in your fifties and sixties and again, like, you're such a kid. But by the time you're in your fifties and your sixties, your diet has become very specific. Right? So you are by default micro micronutrient deficient in something. Right? A Japanese person at the age of 50 is gonna be different than someone from Argentina versus this versus that just based on their food sources, what's in the ground, even if they're eating all natural. You're gonna be deficient in something. Right? So what you wanna do is you wanna replete it with things as if you were growing a brand new baby. You don't need as much. Right? Because you're not actually great growing a baby, but you do need to replete all the micronutrients. So at your age, you probably don't need it. Once you hit 50, 60, 70, absolutely. And I and I think that, like, the whole Centrum Silver thing is ridiculous, because it doesn't actually give you what you need. Yeah. With multivitamins, there's, like, these, clinical trials with, cognitive function and memory, that I've seen that, in older people, it helps with, memory I recall and, this episodic memory. Because they're deficient. So but that's just general health. I don't consider that longevity per se. Like, general health is you're deficient in something, fix it, and then you're done. Mhmm. Right? Yeah. I guess the challenge is that, you know, these multivitamins have all different formulas and the different amounts of things. So you don't know what what amount is actually needed for each nutrient. And, you know, different things are in the multivitamin. There's no, like, criteria. What's what's constitutes a multivitamin? No. No. You're absolutely right, which is why I tell people go with prenatals. Very smart people have figured out exactly what baby cells need. I will tell you that any pregnant woman that took prenatals, their hair grows better, their vision was better, their nails are harder. Everything is better. Why? Because they're not nutrient deficient anymore. As soon as they give birth, they don't take it anymore and everything goes back to where they were before, and then they get kind of annoyed. Like, well, you could take them anytime you want. You know? They're they're gummies from Amazon. I mean, they're they're cheap, they taste good, and they're very useful. Granted, you don't need a full dose, as I said, but they're very helpful. Mhmm. So I was actually looking through my list of other interesting things to sort of bring up. And, one of my my other kicks this year was to work on the different sirtuins because, you know, we've been working on sirtuin one forever. Right? So resveratrol, paterastilbene, and parviflora. But I thought, oh my god. We need to fix three. Right? Three, four, and five run your mitochondria. Three becomes deficient actually before any of the other ones. So I've become a huge believer in dihydromyricetin or honocchiole. But dihydromyricetin dihydromericitin is probably my favorite only because it's more available. It's actually it's fantastic because it's sold online as a hangover killer. Yeah. I I remember that, though. So Hey. The names out there. It's fantastic. Right? And so when you start buying it, you start getting, like, pamphlets from, you know, Alcoholics Anonymous. But, the stuff's amazing, and your energy levels just really increase. It's it's tremendous. Tremendous. So it's like an antigen compound then? Well, well, it's just it's activating SIR two and three, which is gonna up regulate it's the master switch of your mitochondria. So it's gonna increase mitochondrial biogenesis. It increases PCG one alpha. Everything gets up regulated in your mitochondria, so you just have more energy. Right? So you're going to everything that requires energy, which is everything. You're gonna think better. You're gonna, like, process toxins faster, for example, in your liver. You can grow muscle faster. You recover fast. Everything is just better. And you won't notice it when you're younger, but when you start having energy issues, it's a it's a godsend. Yeah. And you don't need to take it with a hangover. You don't need to get the hangover to take it. No. But, you know, it's it's sort of humorous. So my 18 year old daughter is in college, and, she's been doing this stuff with me now for years. So she keeps a bottle of it, like, in her dorm. So when her friends have hangover, she's like, oh, I can fix this. But she's also you know, it's funny. She's decided that she's gonna be the world's youngest biohacker. So she now has, you know, an Instagram, and she puts out posts, and she's working on a website, etcetera, etcetera, etcetera. But She's obviously trying to gear it toward, like, the 20 and under crowd, which is funny, but, I think there's a real appetite for this stuff out there. Yeah. I mean, if you start young, then you'll, get ahead get ahead of the curve. Another, like, you you brought up this kind of, you know, it's a side effect from, like, a hangover supplement, but, these, antihistamines are also quite interesting that they have the senolytic effect effects. And, the last one that I saw was this meclizine that extended lifespan in the same study that Azaxanthin, did so as well. So, are you thinking about what do you think about the antihistamines? So antihistamines I mean, so histamines just so I I don't know if your listeners know this or not. So mast cells are part of your immune system, and when they get activated by allergens, they release histamine. Histamine is a massive inflammatory agent. So it's what causes, like, if you bonk yourself or get bitten or something, it's what brings all the inflammatory processes in. Right? So it causes the redness. It causes the swelling. It causes the itching. It causes all of that. So theoretically, if you got rid of that and you reduced the inflammatory process, yeah, of course, you're gonna do better. Mhmm. I also I you know, I'm not a huge fan only because antihistamines and I, like, I just fall asleep immediately. So for me, that's not a great thing, but I love the idea of it. Mhmm. Yeah. I'm not, like, my myself taking them, but coincidental, like, so, like, our dog gets, like, car sickness, and, he's drooling in the car. And, like, one of the nausea medications we gave him, like, I read, like, the active ingredient is dumetrolidine that was just prompt to extend lifespan. So we're, like, maybe extending our dog's lifespan with that, whenever he's going for a ride. So Yeah. In very small periods of time. That's funny. But if you wanna go down the medication road, so I, I love so I'm an anesthesiologist by training. So I love the idea of of repurposing medications for longevity. Mhmm. And there are just so many really cool interesting medications out there. Yeah. My new favorite that freaks people out is obviously lithium. You know, it it's it's sort of interesting. Number one, low dose lithium has done been demonstrated to decrease all cause morbidity and mortality, which is just really interesting. And then there's this interesting set of studies where people that were bipolar, by default, have shorter telomeres. It's probably oxidative stress related, but we don't really know. If these people that were bipolar have been on lithium for more than two years, then their telomeres are actually longer than regular people's, which is really interesting. Clearly, there are no studies of normal people on lithium because normal people don't really usually take a whole lot of lithium. But based on that and a variety of other positive aspects of lithium, I decided to start taking seventy five milligrams a day. And now I'm up to about a year and a half of doing it. So in, like, six more months, I'll get my telomeres, maybe ten. Five milligrams, that's quite a lot. It's usually the one milligram. Well, it's it is, but it's not. So from a physician point of view, if someone came to you as a person with a bipolar disease or depressed, etcetera, significant, and they put them on lithium, the starting dose is three hundred. And most people bump from three hundred to six hundred to nine hundred. There's even people on twelve hundred milligrams of lithium a day. Wow. So by taking a quarter of the smallest dose, in my world, that's actually quite conservative. Okay. Yeah. That's what I speak out other people. But Yeah. There's also the studies that, lithium in the drinking water is associated with less suicide and less homicide and longevity overall. Mhmm. Yeah. So the answer is I wouldn't recommend licking lithium batteries or anything, but pharmaceutical lithium is is is fantastic. Mhmm. But there's a lot of really, really cool drugs out there. So another one of my favorites is this thing called Celebex. I I I think it's just fantastically esoteric. So Celebex is a Japanese drug approved for gastritis. Right? And what it actually does, it's a heat shock protein activator. Mhmm. Right? So if you take it, it it activates, pretty much everything that increases protein production or or makes proteins not be misfolded. Right? So in your gut lining, it makes it protects the mucosa. Mhmm. It turns out, obviously, it's a systemic drug, so it's going to go everywhere. It's going to reduce all relative risk of any disease that has to do with misfolding. And there's one preliminary study they did with mild Alzheimer's, and they showed a benefit. Interesting. So it's the equivalent of sitting in the sauna if you don't have time. Yeah. Obviously, rapamycin is one of the, like, most notorious, pharmaceutical for lifespan. Are you taking, like, rapamycin or what do you think? Nope. So I just so rapamycin is an has good press. Whoever they hired as press agent, great job. Job well done. So but rapamycin is a monstrous immune suppressor. Right? Which is sometimes good, but sometimes bad. We actually use it for cancer therapy. And, you use it if someone has stents in their heart and you don't want regrowth of tissue because it is a monster mTOR inhibitor. Right? So for people that don't wanna turn over tissue and wanna preserve tissue, it's it's fantastic. Right? The problem is that if you really read through the studies, there are tissues that need to turn over and then can't, such as hippocampus. Right? So there is evidence that it can cause hippocampal shrinking and certain memory issues in in rodents. And I've actually talked to some people that's that feel that they've had some memory issues from rapamycin, for longevity. And it may make your skin look better. It may make, you know, other things better. But if you can't remember it, it's not worth it. It's not worth it. I you know, there's different subdivisions. I mean, there's mTOR one and mTOR two. Rapamycin is like a hammer. I think when we come up with rapalogues that are more specific and we understand them better, then that will be a really good therapy. But at the moment, I don't think we're there. And I personally am not ready to do that. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. Like the mTOR c one is also needed for the other growth of neurons. So if you suppress that, then, yeah, some, neurogeneration risk can be coming. But I I guess you we again, like, you know, periodically taking maybe not all the time, occasionally. Yeah. The problem is we just don't know. Right? I mean, if we're gonna live to, like, a hundred, hundred and twenty or more, right, what is the detrimental effect on your brain turnover if you start doing it too early? And and and no one knows. Yeah. So, you know, who knows? Maybe someone's taking it, and they're gonna do incredibly well. It's the best thing since sliced bread. You know? It's hard to say. But it's everything that we choose to do is a risk relative risk, analysis. And I'm not personally ready to do that. Now now granted, I take a lot of crazy drugs, but that one I don't. You know? People laugh at me. I take allopurinol to lower my uric acid levels that aren't elevated in the first place because I think that, you know, even a standard uric acid level is too high. So I get rid of that. I take, Alders reductase inhibitors because, you know so glucose turns into glucose floating around in your body goes into a cell, turns into sorbitol, and then turns into fructose. And fructose, is 10 times, roughly seven to 10 times more glycosylating than glucose. Right? As well, sorbitol causes horrible osmotic issues, and this is why diabetics have nerve injuries. Glucose goes into the cell, gets turned into sorbitol, sucks in fluid, and it just destroys sort of the inner workings of the cell. Mhmm. So the the the enzyme that takes glucose to sorbitol is called aldose reductase. It's part of the pentiol pathway. And if you block that with aldose reductase inhibitors, theoretically, you'll have more glucose, but you'll have less sorbitol and less fructose, which are significantly worse. Therefore, I take an aldose reductase inhibitor. What would be like some, let's say, I guess, like a mini snack for people who, you know, don't wanna start taking a bunch of, supplements? What would be like some, I guess, essentials? It depends on how old you are. So, you know, so I usually recommend the panacea, to start. So anyone 40 is gonna be sirtuin deficient, NAD deficient, high inflammatory issues and oxidative stress, and some glucose. Right? So those are the big issues. So the panacea is paterastol bean. Unless you have lipid issues, then you go with resveratrol. Astaxanthin, an n a NAD precursor, harnessing, like we talked about, and curcumin that we talked about. So that is the place for people to start if you are above 40. Right. What about, like, young people who are, you know, are early in the game? So so people early in the game, you need to think about your your lifestyle and your family history. So in terms of lifestyle, if you're out in the sun a lot, you need to deal with DNA preservation. So that's astaxanthin and perhaps, some polypodium to increase your DNA repair rates. Right? If you drinking, then you need to up regulate your SIR two and three dihypermercetin. If you are vaping, extreme oxidative stress. Extreme. That's an astaxanthin slash methylene blue dolphinidin thing. Mhmm. If you are a terrible eater, perhaps you need to worry about your your epigenetics game, and you need some sulforaphane and some green tea, that sort of thing. So it's I think it's sort of it's hard to be specific, but at the very least, anyone is gonna benefit from astaxanthin, some methylene blue, some green tea, perhaps some chlorogenic acid Mhmm. Basics. What about, like, omega three or magnesium or something like that? Young people don't really need that yet. That's a that's a middle age problem. Right. The omega three. Yeah. People's metabolism is I mean, unless you're four hundred pounds and you're 12. I don't wanna make fun of those people because they do exist. Generally speaking, your lipid composition, thus leading to the composition in your lipid bilayers, it's not really all that screwed up until you get a little older. Mhmm. Yeah. And yeah, heart disease, you know, starts or, I mean, it starts pretty early, but, manifest itself more in your like, yeah, fifties or sixties. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So so, again, you don't need too much in your thirties. True aging starts around 35 to 38. By the time you are 40, you're very deficient in things. Most people don't really see problems until their mid forties, but, obviously, they've already started aging. By the time you hit 50, if you're not on a significant program, you're behind the eight ball. Most people, you know, by the time they're 60, oh my god. You know, we really need to go full court press. And then we do, you know, exosome infusions and, like, a whole lot of things. But I know young people wanna start early, but they need to just, like, not go overboard on things they don't need yet. Yeah. Don't start taking it like a bunch of pharmaceuticals when you're 20. Yes. Yes. Unless the doctor gives them to you. I don't want them. Yeah. Yeah. But yeah, w when is your, I guess, updates to the books coming out in the list? So I I'm working on it right now. I have rewritten every reason that you age. So that part is done. I am revamping all the agents. It's gonna take me a little while. I hate to put a time thing on it because then someone's gonna say, oh, I heard you're on a podcast. It's coming out next February. Well, it's not. I have a lot of work to do, but it's in it's in progress. Good. Yeah. I'll, looking forward to it. Are you gonna add a glycine there? I I am. It is absolutely on the there's lots of things that that are on the list. Absolutely. Yes. But see, that's g, and that's after the a's. And I'm literally I just finished astaxanthin, and I'm I'm on, apigenin right now. Nice. Because I'm just I I love the fact it's a CD thirty eight inhibitor. Mhmm. Therefore, it's NAD sparing and it's anti inflammatory, which I didn't know until, you know, finally anyone knew until, you know, fairly recently. So anyway but these are the things. I'm trying to find the nuggets that people really need to know in not only new agents, but agents we've talked about before. So I'm I'm going back and just redoing from scratch. Yeah. Where can people, like, stay up to date with that? Where can they learn more about you and your books? Great. So my website is kaufmannprotocol.com. My Instagram is Kaufmann Anti Aging. I try to put updates on there. I'm really terrible at it. I answer all emails myself. So if anyone wants to go on there and send me a note or ask a question, I promise I will get to it. It just takes me a bit of time because it is, me and only me unless my 18 year old comes from college, and then she helps me out sometimes. Alright. Yeah. We'll put the links in the show notes. And, yeah, thanks thanks for coming to the show. My absolute pleasure. Thanks for doing this. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.