I've been tracking my heart rate variability or HRV for over seven years. I've used multiple tracking devices and I've discovered the exact protocols that keep my HRV over a 100 consistently. As a disclaimer, a higher HRV is generally associated with longevity and better health. But you shouldn't compare your HRV to mine or someone else's. What matters more is whether or not your HRV is trending better or worse over time. Rather than focusing on the exact number, you should focus on the trend line. But But in this video I'm gonna share with you what I do to keep my HRV high and what I've learned about the things that move HRV the most based on my own experience and based on the research. I'll start with what has been the biggest contributor to my HRV in my opinion and it's intermittent fasting. I've been doing some form of intermittent fasting for the last twelve years, whether that be the 16 and eight one meal a day or some other type of intermittent fasting. A 2021 study saw that sixteen hours of fasting raises HRV moderately and lowers resting heart rate compared to controls in two within subjects studies. It means that each participant experiences both conditions, which is great because it distinguishes the effect of fasting on HRV, not individual genetics. And based on that, sixteen hours of fasting raises HRV slightly. Another 2025 study on 60 healthy adults saw that eight weeks of the sixteen and eight interval of fasting protocol significantly increased HRV by about 26% and decreased resting heart rate by about eight point eight percent. However, extended fasting like forty eight hours lowers HRV because it activates the sympathetic nervous system. So if you fast too long your HRV can drop because of the increased stress, but a short term fast like sixteen hours actually increases HRV through improving your parasympathetic tone. This fast isn't long enough to make you stressed out but it is long enough to improve your parasympathetic dominance. What I've noticed personally is that if I do some without fasting, I eat a bit less calories, I lose some weight, my HIV is always the highest. If I'm trying to build muscle or gain weight and I'm eating more frequently or just more food, then my HRV is lower. There is a relationship between body weight and HRV with being overweight lowering your HRV and being leaner raising it. Normal weight individuals have the highest HRV and obese ones have the lowest. But even in the overweight category, your HRV is lower even if it's muscle. Underweight individuals tend to also have lower HRV than normal weight ones probably because of similar reasons. Being underweight and eating too little calories lowers your HRV similar to extended fasting because you're not eating enough food and your body might be more stressed out. My HRV has decreased slightly since I've gained more muscle. Seven years ago, I was around seventy four, seventy five kilograms, but now I'm eighty to eighty one and my HRV has dropped from about a 120 to a 100. It's still significantly higher than the average person and I don't think that it's a bad trade off since I have five kilos of more muscle but it just highlights the relationship between body weight and HRV. Being very heavy can lower your HRV. If you're already in normal weight or even low bodyweight then there are some other things that you need to focus on. Exercise is a huge contributor to HRV because it improves your cardiovascular fitness and cardiac function. This 2020 format analysis of 16 randomized controlled trials saw that exercise training that lasted for over twelve weeks could increase HRV by about 58% and increase parasympathetic tone by up to 83 depending on your baseline HRV, the percent increase will be higher if your baseline is lower. Out of aerobic, anaerobic and resistance training, aerobic training was seen to provide the greatest benefits on HRV, but combining aerobic with anaerobic training is better. This 2021 review on healthy older individuals saw that endurance and combined exercise programs increase HRV but resistance training alone did not. For me, my HRV was already very high before I started doing aerobic exercise. Seven to eight years ago I was doing only resistance training with maybe some kettlebell intervals but I didn't do any specific aerobic exercise. But there's a reason why my HRV might have been still high despite doing no cardio and that is walking. This 2020 study on over 8,000,000 Fitbit users saw that daily step count correlated linearly with HRV. The higher the daily step count, the higher the HRV across all ages. They saw increases in HRV with up to 20,000 steps per day. What I did was I used to walk 15 ks even up to 20 ks steps every day back in the day and this was probably one of the reasons why my HRV was still very high. Today I'm walking maybe eight to 10,000 steps per day, maybe 12,000. But instead of walking more I'm doing aerobic exercise which as we showed increases HRV. So it's kind of a balance. I'm walking less but I'm doing more aerobic exercise. So despite walking less, my HRV is still high thanks to the increased aerobic exercise. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices which are the Bond Charge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes, they do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin anti aging, hormone optimization, pain management and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes. Especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the bond charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most regular Therapeutices don't have the right wavelengths of light, which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Boncharge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research. And they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code SIIM, s I I m, for 15% discount. Another reason why my HRV might have been high without doing cardio is because I was doing a lot of sauna. Sauna is basically a mini cardio workout because it raises your heart rate. There is research that sauna raises HRV. During the sauna, HRV drops because of increased heart rate and stress but after the sauna, HRV rebounds and increases. However, taking the sauna after exercise doesn't enhance HRV more than exercise alone. So if you exercise, you're less likely to see an increase in HRV from sauna. However, if you take the sauna on the days you don't exercise, you would see an increase because the sauna mimics some of the benefits of exercise. I've been taking the sauna since I was like one years old and I do think that it has great benefits on cardiovascular health, fitness and stress management. Your body's resilience increases through the small stress and because of that your parasympathetic regulation also improves which reflects in a higher HRV. Speaking of combining things then combining the sauna with cold exposure like an ice bath, first of all it feels great but it may also have some unique benefits. A 2024 meta analysis saw that cold exposure with cold water immersion or cryo led to a significant increase in HRV by about 20 to 30%. So this additional mini workout has benefits on your HR V. I personally don't do a lot of ice baths but I do a cold shower almost every morning. But when I do have access to jumping into a cold lake or taking an ice bath then I usually do it. Now that I shared with you the biggest things that increase HR V, what about the opposite? What things reduce HRV? Getting a cold or the flu, a fever will lower your HRV and you can see your HRV dropping a day or two before you get a fever. A small flu can be detected with a drop in HRV even if you don't have any symptoms. Jet lag or circadian mismatch tend to mess up my HRV for a day or two but it's temporary. The same with sleep, if I'm under sleeping less than seven hours then my HRV is lower. Overtraining will lower HRV because of the cardiac and autonomic stress. A drop in HRV is a sign you might be overreaching with your training, and it's better to get a bit of more recovery. Eating too late in the evening or just eating too much junk food, high calorie, high glycemic, high salt foods tend to raise your heart rate, which lowers HRV. Stress lowers HRV by increasing sympathetic nervous system activity and increasing heart rate. There are many studies showing how psychological stress lowers HRV, so getting better at stress management is a key component. This is different from physiological stressors that can have benefits such as exercise, sauna, intermittent fasting, and the cold exposure which as I've showed in this video increase HRV. The key is recovery. The small stress facilitates improved cardiac function but it only increases your parasympathetic tone and HRV if you actually recover from the stress. That's how the human physiology and adaptation works. Overall, HRV is a good biomarker of cardiovascular health and cardiovascular fitness as well as your parasympathetic nervous system balance. High HRV is associated with longevity especially if it's combined with a high v h max and a low resting heart rate. High HRV, low resting heart rate is a good combo, but having low resting heart rate and low HRV is not the ideal scenario. There are a 100 other biomarkers you want to pay attention to when it comes to health. Check out my video where I rank a 100 biomarkers from most vital to least important.