I tried walking a 100,000 steps in one day. That's 75 kilometers or 46 and a half miles which would be a straight line distance between London and Oxford. A 100,000 steps is 2700% more steps than what the average American walks in a day. Will I make it or will I fail? Alright. So it's 7AM and here's the game plan. I need to walk pretty much 7,700 steps every hour if I'm gonna plan to finish at 8PM. You know? Maybe chances are I'll be probably going a bit longer than that, maybe until nine to 10PM. But, yeah, in a perfect world, 5.6 kilometers per hour speed and 7,700 steps every hour. What I'm gonna use to measure is the o ring. Right? But the o ring works only if you're, like, actually just walking in real life with your hand. So if I'm outside, going to the store, walking the dog, whatever, then I'm gonna use the Oura ring to count my steps. If I'm working on a computer, then it's obviously not going to count any steps because my hand is on the keyboard, so it doesn't count the steps that I'm taking on this treadmill. But the treadmill itself has a step counter. So basically, I'm just gonna sum up the Oura ring steps plus the treadmill steps at the end of the day and see because that's, you know, whenever I'm on the computer, the Oura ring isn't counting my steps. Whenever I'm outside, the Oura ring does count my steps. One hour later. The Oura ring shows I have had 4,000 steps and the walking pad shows 4,500 steps. So 8,500 steps. It's, kind of 9AM right now. I'm kinda still a bit behind. I started a bit later, but, regardless, I'm, at 8,500 here. So I'm kinda falling behind at the moment. Now for the record, walking a 100,000 steps, it has nothing to do with health. I just use it as a, you know, fun challenge and educational content. On a daily basis, you don't really need to walk any more than 9,000 steps per day. A 2023 analysis of 12 studies saw that going from 2,000 steps a day to 8,700 steps was associated with a sixty percent lower all cause mortality risk and a fifty one percent lower heart disease risk. Going up to 16,000 steps provided an additional five percent reduction, but the majority of benefits came from just going from 2,000 to 8,700 steps. So I don't think that you really need to walk more than 9,000 steps in one day. I'm making sure that you will not fail. Am I going back in time? Well, you need to catch up your steps. I'm reducing my steps. I don't know. My steps are going down. So it's 1PM, and I'm at 30 k steps, which means I'm behind 16 k steps according to the aggressive estimate of the timeline. But, in this speed, I'll probably have to finish around 10PM if I'm gonna keep going at, this speed, but maybe I'll just go for a run and catch up on, that. At this pace, I knew I wasn't going to make it, so I had to incorporate some faster walking and running. So it's 4PM, and, I have actually crossed over the 50 k line halfway through the challenge, but I'm still behind 15 k steps. So I still need to catch up. Babe, what are you doing? Go walk. By 5PM, I knew I had to step up my step game if I was going to finish before midnight. So, I just locked in for the next few hours, I took Apollo out for a long walk, I ran around with him to play, I walked on the treadmill for several hours straight and by 7PM, I was over 75 ks steps which means I still had one third to go. One eternity later. Alright. So it's 11:17PM, and, we finished the challenge. We reached a 100 k steps. So the total is I got 37 k steps on the Oura ring and 63.6 k steps in the, walking treadmill. Generally, I'm feeling quite fine. I'm just feeling a little bit sweaty. I'm gonna take a shower or go to bed and, let my leg rest. Alright. So it's the next day. Let's recap some of my experience. I walked a 100 k steps and it took me about seventeen hours. Out of which I was walking pretty much sixteen hours. It ended up taking 75 kilometers of walking and based on the o ring and the walking pad, it burned seven to 200 calories, which I'm not sure how accurate it is but I probably burned at least 5,000 calories. Physically, it wasn't that difficult for me. I never felt like I had to quit or I couldn't take it anymore. Honestly, I could have kept going for another 50 ks or something, but it just takes so much time and I don't wanna mess up my sleep schedule. Around 50 ks steps, I did start to feel like my legs were a bit sore and my knees started to get a bit more stiff. I think that's just because of the repetitive motion, especially walking on a treadmill. You're just hitting the floor with your feet for such long hours. It would probably be very different if you were to walk on, like, sand or grass or something soft. During the walking, my body temperature and metabolism increased quite significantly. I wasn't like sweating profusely but my body was very hot and evaporating a lot of heat because of the exercise. I also ended up going for number two in the bathroom at least four to five times during this day, which I think was because of this increased metabolic rate that I got from the exercise. Usually, I go for number two maybe once or twice a day. The hardest part of the challenge was, yeah, just the time investment. Eventually, it just kinda gets annoying. You're like, I have to do this for the next three, four hours and there's no, like, real innate need for it. You know, I did it mostly for the content and for the fun challenge. That's why on a regular basis, I'm still kind of only walking around 8,000 to 10,000 steps per day, maybe up to 12,000. Walking is just one part of a healthy movement plan. It's not going to replace resistance training. Even if you walk a 100,000 steps every day. Check out my full evidence based workout plan for longevity next.