This is my first roundtable, so I'm honored to share it with you two, fellow knights of the roundtable. And the theme of today's discussion is dietary supplements for longevity. If you were to imagine a situation in which resources are no issue, so you have all the time, all the money, and you get to give a body weight adjusted dose of up to two nutraceuticals and or drugs to every adult age 30 or older, and you could choose the dose and the frequency if you want people to live longer and have as long a health span as possible, which would you pick? And I'm gonna start with you, Nick, because alphabetically, you come first. Thanks. Two molecules that I can I can give people? It's not gonna help necessarily with a lifespan, but it is going to help with health span, and I would argue creatine. I guess it doesn't really necessarily have to be, weight adjusted, but that would be one of them. The other one, again, off the top of my head, would be, let's say, something a little more potent like rapamycin, which probably, at least based off of what I've seen, seems to have some pretty promising results in terms of longevity and, and health span. So those are my those are my two choices. What do you go foresee? That's given you some time to think about it. There's obviously a difference between, like, healthspan and, lifespan. I think creatine is, yeah, for sure, like, one of the best healthspan supplements for, brain performance and, physical performance. Arguably, if you extend health span, you probably extend lifespan as well a little bit. Creatine is, yeah, like, a kind of safe bet to that, especially, like, older people would benefit a lot from. Number two, I would say, probably is, like, let's say, like, a high quality omega-three supplement, mostly for, like, cardiovascular benefits, brain benefits, helps with inflammation and immunity and all those other related metabolic benefits and, you know, higher blood omega-three levels are associated with longevity, so there might be something there. If I were to add like an actual, let's say, lifespan pharmaceutical, then grabamycin is quite interesting and it's I would think that it has potential, you know, maybe in the future, we'll see, in the next next few years, maybe there are some clinical trials on that. But, you know, I would for the general population, I would think that actually something like a carbo's or metformin would be also relatively safe bet because, it's pretty safe and, you know, most people just have slightly higher blood sugar and slightly worse blood markers than, it should be for optimal longevity. The lifespan data about metformin isn't that convincing. Acarbose might be more convincing than metformin, but, for just the idea of postponing metabolic disease and reducing the risk of diabetes, that will probably be be one of the, like, actual pharmaceuticals that could also have some effects. I too would pick creatine monohydrate, and then my second choice would probably be a GLP one receptor agonist. If we're speaking about the general population, which I would choose, I'm not sure. It probably wouldn't be tizetatide. It would probably be semaglutide because we know quite a lot about it at this point. It would be a relatively low dose, and I'm not saying that it's something that would benefit everyone. It probably wouldn't benefit any of the three of us, for instance. But if we're speaking about the GenpOp, then I think it's a really strong choice, particularly when it comes to creatine. And, interestingly, if you do consider the cost of distributing that to everyone and you look at that relative to the potential health care savings, then right now, it wouldn't make financial sense because somaglutide is really expensive. And there was recently an economic analysis looking at that and tizapatide and a couple of other obesity medications. But cost isn't a factor in this hypothetical scenario. If cost were a factor, then would you modify your responses? For creatine, I don't think you would. So we can disregard that and instead focus on the other choices. Rapamycin is definitely coming down in cost. There's a few companies that sell it now that have it not super, super expensive, but it's definitely pricier. Metformin is much, much cheaper. So I might be convinced to go that route because I really like Seem's, thought process on it, especially if you're talking about the general population. You know, especially as you get older, you might be getting into that prediabetic, level. So, potentially, metformin would be a a great benefit in that regard. So, yeah, I could be swayed on that. Because GLP ones have, like, a double whammy effect that they also help with weight loss, in addition to blood sugar. So in that sense, they're more potent than metformin. I wouldn't know which one to do. It depends, yeah, on the if there's no cost, then perhaps some future generation GLP ones that are safer. Maybe not as potent as the one that is used for obesity. Maybe there's, like, something that's 50% as effective as the Ozempicronomic and that's maybe that would be more suitable for the general population. And just to be clear, metformin is a cheap drug. So Yeah. Your low cost option can remain metformin, which might be my choice. I'm not sure. It's a good candidate. Another one that I think might prove to be very interesting is Toreen, and we'll come back to that later. And on that subject, we might come back to it now. I don't know. What are a couple of most underappreciated