Reishi mushroom is a medicinal mushroom that's been used in traditional medicine for thousands of years. It's known for its anti inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects. But the biggest thing I use reishi for is sleep. And it's not just a regular sleep aid. Every single night I take reishi, I get very interesting, strange and vivid dreams. And it's not just me. It also happens to my wife and virtually every other person I've told to take reishi. One example would be that I'm on this Alazian flying carpet and flying through the night with my wife. Or something else that we're in a room with our real life friends and one of the friends is just inhaling helium balloon and saying Yippee for no reason. So what is happening here? Why is Reishi giving me these kind of interesting dreams? Animal research has shown that Reishi prolongs sleep duration and improves sleep quality. It also increases REM sleep, which is where dreaming occurs, and it suppresses locomotor activity, which reduces movements in your sleep. A 2001 study on sixty patients with insomnia found that reishi showed potential improvements in sleep. Now there isn't a lot of clinical trials on reishi and sleep, but there are a few of them that do indicate that it does help with sleep. And we have some animal research as well supporting that. The anti insomnia effects of reishi appear to be derived from the polysaccharides called beta sitosterol and triterpenoids that modulate the immune and nervous system. These polysaccharides in Reishi increase serotonin and GABA, which are neurotransmitters that regulate alertness and relaxation. However, in high amounts, they can also promote dreaming. Another beta glucan in Reishi called Ganopoli appears to also have anxiolytic properties, which reduces anxiety. This helps to reduce stress and anxiety, which again promotes better sleep. So it looks like reishi is a perfect storm of ingredients that can help with sleep and dreaming. This is why me, my wife, and other people see more dreams and they appear to see better when they take reishi. I've tried many different forms of reishi. I've tried tinctures. I've tried capsules. I've also tried to make tea out of it. And they all appear to work. I don't notice any difference between the oral tincture and capsules. They work the same way for me. Now this doesn't mean that you have to start taking reishi. I don't take reishi every night. But it's just interesting to try it out and you can experience the dreams and the vividness yourself. Like with all supplements, you have to be careful with the sourcing. But it's especially true with medicinal mushrooms because these mushrooms, they absorb air pollution and other environmental pollutants. So if you're ordering mushrooms from China, which a lot of brands do, then you might not get the cleanest, purest source of mushrooms. Probably the cleanest medicinal mushrooms in the world come from kappa mushrooms in Finland, which is one of the cleanest air and cleanest forests in the world. I'm not sponsored by Kappa. They just have the cleanest mushrooms. Overall, reishi can be a good sleep aid, especially for dreaming and relaxation, but it doesn't replace the core fundamentals of a healthy sleep. Check out my full evidence based sleep routine video next to learn how to optimize your sleep and sleep better.