Dehydration is actually one of those signals that then forces your body to sort of up regulate all of those processes. When you become dehydrated, when you're sweating more, that forces your body to say, oh, we gotta uptick production of, say, EPO, and we gotta increase our plasma volume expansion. So if you're in the sauna and you're chugging a gallon of water and really not not letting your body reach that dehydration point, like, dehydration is kind of the point of the sauna sometimes. You don't get, like, a plateau where, oh, I'm not benefiting from the sauna anymore because I've been doing thirty minutes three times a week for years. You're still gonna keep getting those benefits. Unlike exercise where at a certain point, you're gonna kind of plateau in your benefits, you need to add more exercise. I don't really think that that happens the same way with the sauna. Brady, welcome back to the show. Same. Thanks for inviting me back on. Happy to chat. Yeah. We did our first podcast about, VO two max and, aerobic fitness, like, a year ago. And, yeah. This time I wanted to bring you back so that we could talk about something very interesting in my opinion, which, both of us have written about on online and in our books, which is a heat acclimation. And, how does it relate to cardiovascular fitness and how can we, you know, leverage that for better performance and health as well. So, I don't know. Maybe you can start with, giving an introduction to heat acclimation and what does it actually entail? Sure. So heat acclimation sometimes goes kind of by the other names like heat acclimatization, but all the things mean pretty much the same thing. So, essentially, you know, you're training your body to perform better in the heat. And there are several ways to do it, and then there are several adaptations that occur. So how to do it, you know, it's it seems pretty obvious. I'm sure we'll talk about some of those strategies. But the typical strategy is to exercise in the heat. You know, endurance athletes use it a lot, not just endurance athletes. You know, I'm sure other types of athletes use it too, but exercising in the heat, an environment that is hotter or as hot as, say, the environment that you're going to be performing in. And it's a strategy because, you know, if, say, if it's winter and you're gonna be performing, you know, at the Tokyo Olympics next summer or something or you're training in the spring, what's gonna be really hot there? And if your body's not ready to handle it, obviously, the heat is is a huge stress. So exercising in the heat, typically, you can, you know, also wear some layers with that or add extra humidity. Athletes will typically do that to prepare themselves to perform in hot conditions. And the classical adaptations that occur, several adaptations occur when you do these strategies. I'm sure we'll get into some of the strategies. But the first one is and maybe paradoxically, some people, but you will sweat more, and you will start to sweat earlier. That is one of the main adaptations to heat acclimation. So it's funny because a lot of the times you will say, you know, if somebody's outside and it's maybe a little bit hot and they're sweating a lot, you might think, oh, that a person's, like, out of shape. Why are they sweating? But really, the more heat acclimated you get, you're gonna start sweating earlier and you're gonna sweat more. And that makes a lot of sense from a physiological perspective because what is the point of sweating? Well, we sweat and that, sweat evaporates and it cools off the body. It helps us cool down. So the earlier you can start sweating when you're exercising in heat and the more that you can sweat, the better that you will be able to perform in the, the better, you'll be be better able to handle, the heat and regulate your body temperature. So earlier onset of sweating, more sweating, that's kind of one of the classic signs of heat acclimation. There's probably also something that goes on and I'm not too aware, updated on this, but, like, with the sodium content of your sweat as well. Because obviously, if you're sweating a lot and sweating out a lot of electrolytes, that's not a good thing. You wanna replace those. So sweating, one of the key adaptations as well. Several things also happen though in the body, and this will relate to, you know, the cardiovascular performance stuff that we're gonna, I'm sure, get into later, but your plasma volume expands. So, you know, you get more plasma volume. You're just that expands as well. And your red blood cell volume also maybe expands a little bit, in addition to that, which would, you know, higher hemoglobin, higher hematocrit, so higher percent of your blood becomes red blood cells. Very similar to something that occurs with altitude training, which is kind of neat. There's some really interesting data on that. So overall, those are kind of the two key adaptations. Your heart rate, in the heat during exercise is going to be lower due to that expansion of plasma volume and just the fact that you can better regulate your body temperature. So those are kind of the two key adaptations that occur. And when you say somebody's being acclimated to the heat, that's what happens to allow you to just handle the heat better at rest also. But, you know, key is during exercise as well. Yeah. I think, yeah, the main thing people associate with it is that you're just tolerating the heat more. And, yeah, you're gonna get less tired in the heat, I guess, so you can exercise longer. But, you know, there's also research that just just being more heat acclimated will also improve your performance at normal temperatures, so to say. Because one of the things that, I guess, limits your performance is your rising body temperature. And if you're more heat tolerant, then that, you know, first of all, you will delay that rising body temperature. And second of all, you'll also be able to tolerate it for a bit longer. So there's, like, both ways it supports performance that, yes, in a hot climate, you'll be just able to tolerate it better and, perform better, but, your performance even in normal temperatures will also just improve because of postponing the rise in body temperature that, makes you bunk in your performance. Yeah. I think that's an important point that you make because a lot of people will think, well, if I'm not going to be doing an endurance race in the heat or if I'm not gonna be doing the competition in the heat, why do I need to heat acclimate? Well Mhmm. Yeah. Like you just mentioned, you if you get better at performing in the heat and you kinda put yourself in that under that stress of heat acclimation, you're gonna perform way better in cooler temperatures too. I experience this every single year. So I live in Texas in The United States, and so training over the summer, super hot, super humid. Then I I go to a marathon race in the fall. It's 50 degrees. It's cool, low humidity. You perform really well because those adaptations carry over. But something interesting too about heat acclimation, you know, is unfortunately, you know, the well, fortunately, the benefits happen really quickly. One to two weeks after you start doing some of these heat acclimation protocols, you get those adaptations that we were just talking about, but you lose them very quick. So if you stop for about a week, almost all that stuff is, like, goes back to baseline. Just similar to altitude. You know, if you're training at altitude, you go to sea level for a week, you kind of lose out on all those. So you sort of have to take advantage of them kind of quickly. Gotcha. Yeah. You know, exercise itself is also a form of heat acclimation then, I guess, because your body temperature rises. And, you know, if you're very used to exercising, then, you know, that also is a form of or that, you know, obviously will increase your performance over time. And one way is that it is a kind of soft version of heat acclimation. But I think, yeah, the one thing that we wanna talk a bit more about as well is, saunas because that's, I guess, heat acclimation with us, you know, specifically training for heat acclimation. Obviously, people take the saunas for other reasons, you know, it feels good and it's has like cardiovascular benefits but, athletes tend to do it for the heat acclimation, benefits. Yeah. They do. And the sauna is interesting because, you know, some of the things that I was just talking about when athletes usually do heat acclimation, that's sort of what you would call active. So I'm gonna go outside and run-in the heat, and I'm gonna maybe wear extra layers. That's active because I'm exposing myself to the heat, but I'm also exercising during it. With the sauna, it's a little bit different. I mean, I'm sure if you have a sauna at home and wanna put a treadmill or something in there, you could do that. I wouldn't probably recommend combining that with, the the sauna. But, it's passive heat acclimation. So you're getting in the sauna. You're getting those heat acclimation benefits, but you're not actually exercising, which can be good and bad, obviously. Mhmm. Yeah. So, how would you let's say, a regular person go about doing it? So they don't have any specific training in mind if they want to just yeah. Okay. Wanna you know, like I said, the it is a good perk or a good advantage to be able to tolerate the heat a little bit more because, you know, at least I I don't like to just feel super hot all the time. It's, you know, bad for many other reasons. But, yeah, how would how would I, like, combine this kind of exercise program with, saunas? Or or would I be better off by doing this, yeah, training in the heat, turning off the AC in the gym or something like that? Yeah. So for for say, like, the beginner or maybe somebody who is not, an athlete training for something, if they're just maybe exercising for health and wanna add the sauna to sort of get some of these or add heat acclimation to get some of these benefits, I really wouldn't recommend doing sort of this active heat acclimation because it can be pretty uncomfortable. And I feel like it's a little bit more of an advanced strategy maybe for athletes who are kind of, like, looking to take their performance to the next level. You could maybe, if it's hot outside, put on an extra jacket and do that. That can certainly be a good way to do it. But, yeah, let's talk about the sauna. I think there are two ways that you could kind of use the sauna as an addition to a cardiovascular training program. The first would be simply just add a couple sauna extra sauna sessions per week. So maybe you're doing two to three endurance exercise sessions a week. Maybe you're doing some hit high intensity interval training, your zone two sessions. And what I would say then is just maybe on the days you're not doing cardio, add the sauna. So do twenty to thirty minutes in the sauna, you know, an extra two to three times per week. Because in a way, it's an exercise mimetic. That's kind of how I refer to the sauna where you're getting a lot of the same responses in the sauna as you would to low intensity exercise. Heart rate goes up. You start sweating. Body temperature goes up. Your stroke volume goes up. All those things. So you could just add the sauna on maybe days you're not doing aerobic exercise. That's going to give you those passive heat acclimation benefits. It's going to just benefit your cardiovascular health as you mentioned and sort of supplement your endurance training that you're doing. You could also do it on your strength training days, you know, as well maybe if you're gonna do it that way. But the second way to combine it, and this is my preferred way of doing it, there's a lot of interesting research to sort of support this protocol is tack it on to the end of your endurance exercise session or your cardio session. So maybe let's just say somebody does Monday, Monday, Wednesday, Friday, they do thirty to forty five minutes of zone two cardio. So you're gonna go do that forty five minutes zone two cardio. Maybe it's longer, maybe it's shorter. And then right after, so as little bit of a time increment between them as possible, hop right in the sauna after you're done. Almost, you know, you don't even wanna stop sweating if if possible. So maybe you're on the treadmill at the gym. Maybe your gym has a sauna. You go right in the sauna after your cardiovascular exercise session. Essentially, you know, I think that has several benefits. One, your body temperature is still elevated from exercise. Your heart rate is still somewhat elevated from exercise. So when you're getting in that sauna, you're sort of extending that cardio session by a little bit and sort of, you know, you're you're making that forty five to sixty minute cardio session, you know, maybe eighty to ninety minutes long. It's not obviously the same intensity, but you're you're sort of still extending it. Your heart rate's elevated, body temperature's staying elevated. And there's also, you know, several studies at this point showing that when combined with a cardio training intervention, endurance exercise intervention, the sauna will increase your VO two max, increase some of these other markers of cardiovascular performance better than, say, exercise training alone. So it's, addition, and it's giving you that extra boost without actually stressing the body more. Obviously, you could just run more. You could run ninety minutes, but a lot of people maybe you're maxed out. Maybe you just can't exercise anymore and you don't want to risk getting injured, but you do sort of want those cardiovascular benefits. I think that's what, the sauna is really good for. And I do that especially when the temperatures kind of start to drop. I'll do that two to three times a week. I'll, like, run to the gym, get in the sauna right after my run, and, finish that way. So, somebody told me there was also there was, like, a word, maybe a Swedish phrase for the sauna called, like, lanky sauna or something. There was, like, a name for it. It basically meant sauna after a run, which I which I kinda liked. So I don't know if that really exists. Maybe they made it up, but I thought that was a cool cool phrase. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices, which are the bond charge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes, they do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin anti aging, hormone optimization, pain management and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes. Especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the Bond Charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most rheumatoidizers don't have the right wavelengths of light, which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Bont Charge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research, and they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code SIIM, s I I m, for a 15% discount. Yeah. I guess the sauna is like a passive exercise that, it, obviously doesn't involve active muscle contraction, but it is a good cardiovascular, workout. So you're getting, a lot of minor of these small amount of these additional benefits from that. And, yeah, I guess it's like almost like even blood flow restriction training that, you know, you're getting benefits with less effort, compared to, like, actual workout. Yeah. I would agree. And, you know, it is obviously, the sauna is a stress. I don't think it's, you know, it's not free lunch. You can't just do as much sauna as possible and gain all these benefits, especially for athletes. And I I'm try I I'm wary of this myself where if you do too much sauna, you can certainly, you know, literally, I guess, and metaphorically burn yourself out. You can really do too much. And so you have to be wary of doing too much sauna on top of your training. But I think as an additional two to three sessions per week, yeah. It's you're not risking you're not elevating your injury risk. You're not increasing impact of extra running, extra cycling, or or something like that, but you're getting these extra benefits. Yeah. How much, I guess, it's obviously not going to be as effective as some interval training for Realtomax, but, how much of an, like, additional boost would someone expect to gain? Like, is it something that really would move the needle for her? Like, is it, yeah, like, the difference between the first place and the second place in, Olympics? Or is it just, you know, you know, kind of small benefits, but they're still significant? Yeah. Potentially, I think, you know, some of the studies, what are they showing is, like, a a two to three mls per kg per minute increase in in VO two max above what you're gonna get with training. So, you know, with training, say, eight to twelve weeks, you can maybe improve your VO two max by four to five mls per kg. That sauna might get you an extra two to three mls per kg per minute, which would, you know, is is significant. Yeah. And I think, you know, VO two max is obviously an important component, and a lot of people are striving to sort of optimize that. But a lot of these studies also will show that even if VO two max doesn't increase, if runners or endurance athletes use the sauna, they they perform better in the heat if they combine it with their training, but they also perform better in temperate conditions. So cool conditions, if they add the sauna to their training. Mhmm. Gotcha. So I guess, yeah, it adds still extra benefits. But, yeah, in in in the heat acclimation scenario, because, you know, the sauna is a lot hotter than, you know, outside air even unless someone is running in some sort of really, extreme heat. Because, you know, most saunas are gonna be, let's say, 70 degrees Celsius. You know, there's not never gonna be a situation outside where you'll be at 70 degrees Celsius. But, you know, doing your body doing the exercise, your body temperature does rise. So I guess the question is, which one is better for the heat acclimation training? Is, the sitting in a sauna not exercising, or is it outside in a heat exercising, which raises your body temperature? Which one is better for, like, getting the heat acclimation, heat adaptation benefits? Yeah. That's a really good question. I would probably tend to favor the active heat acclimation because you're simulating more so what you're going to be doing. I mean, if you're trying to heat acclimate for a certain reason, say to perform, maybe you have a race, a marathon that you're gonna run-in a hot environment, then I think that active heat acclimation does a little bit better because you're forcing your body to perform well under stress. You know, the muscles are contracting, you're running, and you're getting that heat stress. So it may not be as hot as the sauna, but if your goal is actually performance, I think the active heat acclimation is a little bit better. But if you're kind of just interested maybe then in the health benefits and maybe making your exercise feel a little bit easier, then, you know, the passive could also be a good idea. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. I guess, you know, it's one of the similar to the question of why do athletes do a lot of zone two. A lot of it is because of it, is less stressful on the nervous system and that it, you know, they can, do more of it without, overtraining. Mhmm. And I guess a similar scenario is with the sauna that, you know, yes, obviously, too much sauna can be harmful, but, you know, training in the desert, in extreme heat is still significantly more stressful to you than being in the sauna. So I guess it's like one way of stacking additional heat acclimation hours under your belt during the training. Right. Exactly. I would not recommend you know, if you're somebody who wants to actually improve your performance, the number one way to do that is obviously to train more. I don't think it's do you know the sauna is exactly gonna give you thirty minutes of sauna is not thirty minutes of of exercise. But if you're somebody who yeah. I've kind of reached the limit as to how much I can exercise in a week, and I really don't want to say run more, then, yes. I think that's kind of where the sauna comes into play. If you're sort of maxed out in terms of I'm just not gonna, like, do any more minutes of exercise. Mhmm. What about, like, the recovery and injury perspective? So there was actually some recent studies with saunas, after exercise helping with muscle strength, specifically, and so, like, muscle growth as well as recovery. So, have you noticed anything yourself when doing the sauna about that? Like, are you recovering faster? Are you recovering faster from injuries and just overtraining? And what's your, like, take on the research about it? The recovery aspect is really interesting. It's that's one of actually the main reasons why. I, will use the sauna if I have a recovery day where I'm not running or something like that. I'll go in the sauna for thirty minutes, and then just an additional couple days per week going in there. I do feel like it helps recovery because it's an active form of recovery. You know? Again, you're getting you're getting the increase in blood flow, so you're getting kind of circulating things around, flushing things out. I hate the word flushing. It's not really that physiological, but, you know, it feels like that's happening. But you're, you're getting the blood flow mainly, and you're forcing your heart to kind of, you know, pump blood throughout the body. So I think there's a huge recovery aspect to the sauna. The strength stuff is interesting because, you know, there are several studies showing that the saunas may have somewhat of an anabolic effect where similar to using it after a cardio session, using it after strength training might increase muscle protein synthesis. And overall, I mean, it kind of makes sense because you're just getting you're getting this increase in blood flow. So you're delivering more nutrients to the muscle. You're, you know, circulating amino acids. And so you're just gonna get this greater anabolic response, which I think is is very interesting. Also, anti catabolic effects too though. So if you are injured, say, using the sauna appears to have this effect on reducing, like, muscle protein breakdown. So if you're trying to maintain your strength, maybe if you're injured or if you're not as active as you might want to be, I think using the sauna, because like the heat shock proteins and other things that are elevated when you're in the sauna, they kind of work to counteract, you know, maybe some muscle breakdown. So I think that's super cool. And, yes, definitely sauna for recovery, one of my favorite, modalities as well. Same thing with, you know, hot hot baths, getting in hot water. I think similar to the sauna, you're gonna get the increased blood flow, the increased temperature, which I think is good. But something interesting that you get with the water is sort of that pressure, which actually will also help with the blood flow. So you sort of get this compressive pressure, this hydrostatic pressure when your body is underwater, and that can help as well. So if your main goal is recovery, I would almost recommend maybe a hot bath over the sauna, but I think the sauna feels good, and I'm I'm a little more partial to the sauna too. Especially due to some of the, the fertility stuff that, data on the hot baths, it's not too great if you're a male, trying to maintain your fertility to you might wanna stay out of the hot baths. Yeah. Yeah. But and because you can't even use the ice ice cubes or ice pack in the bath. Yeah. No. You can't. You can use it in sauna, but not in the bath. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You mentioned the bath. So there's a few actually studies already now showing that you get equal this equal hypothermia in the the hot bath, even like greater even greater than in the sauna. So, you know, one of the reasons why the sauna has these benefits is because it raises your body temperature. So, yeah, you can get the same same benefits from the hot bath and because, yeah, you're in hot water. Yeah. And probably quicker. I mean, you know, if if it's hot enough and because you're in direct contact with that water, you know, you a lot of these studies, it's kind of crazy. They stay in for a long time, which I guess you might need to do to get some of those adaptations, but they're keeping them in, like, a 100 and, you know, four degrees Fahrenheit. I'm not sure what that is in Celsius, but 104 Fahrenheit for, like, forty five to sixty minutes, which is pretty insane. I don't think you have to stay in that long, but, yeah, you get a quicker rise of body temperature in the water just because your skin is in direct contact with that water as opposed to the sauna, which takes a little bit longer. Yeah. Yeah. I think it's a 40 degrees Celsius. It's one of the ones that's slightly I've seen. But, what about, cooling? So that's also kind of interesting. Obviously, the people use ice baths a lot after exercise, after workouts. And I think, you know, by now, we most people know that, okay, don't take the ice bath after, lifting weights because it can reduce the inflammation that would increase muscle growth. But, for cardiovascular workout, what do you think about that? Is it safe to do it after cardio? I think it's safe. You know, the data there aren't as strong as they are for strength training in terms of it being detrimental. I don't really think that it's it's probably a bad idea. I would still just be a little bit cautious and probably separate it by maybe a few hours. And, obviously, there are certain situations if you're preparing for a competition or really trying to dampen down muscle soreness, then maybe getting an ice bath, you know, it it does reduce muscle soreness, and some studies have shown that. But why I would be weary of even doing it right after is because just overall, you know, you see a reduction. Ice tends to reduce muscle protein synthesis, and we often think about muscle protein synthesis when it comes to strength training. Oh, you want muscle protein synthesis to build and repair new muscles, but you get more mitochondria also due to protein synthesis. Protein synthesis is just building, skeletal muscle fibers. You know, our body needs to make proteins for mitochondrial proteins. It needs to make proteins for, you know, enzymes for metabolic processes. And so protein synthesis is just as important for endurance exercise and adaptations as it is for strength training. So for that reason, I would probably say, you know, stay away from it at least chronically. Like, don't take a ice bath every single day after your training session. What I think could be possibly good is doing some sort of contrast therapy. So if you have an ice bath and a sauna right by one another or ice bath and a cold bath, ice bath ice bath and a warm bath right next to each other, go in between those for that recovery benefit because you get that sort of contraction from the cold water when you get in, then you get in the hot bath, you get that vasodilation. And I think alternating those can be good. And as long as you're not in the ice bath for more than a couple minutes, I don't think it's that detrimental. The problem is when you stay in there for fifteen, twenty minutes and you're really just getting you're, like, kind of shutting things down. I don't think doing a plunge, say, getting in there for a minute or two is really gonna be that detrimental. So if it feels good, and you wanna do it, do that. But, the contrast may be a little bit better idea if if that's something you have available. So short story there, I don't think it's as detrimental. You certainly wanna stay away from it after strength training, maybe after endurance training, but, I wouldn't be as as worried about it. But it's probably not the best. Yeah. Well, is is there anything such like a cold adaptation that if you're, used to training in the cold or you're used to taking ice baths, you'll get better at tolerating the cold and training in the cold? No. There's actually not. So cold adaptation, like, really isn't a a thing. I think the the adaptation is going to be mental. It's going to just be, like, the psychological adaptation. I think if you if you kind of train yourself to maybe tolerate the cold better, then you're gonna be able to maybe perform better in the cold. But in terms of the physiology, at least that I'm aware of, there's not really a, you know, cold is cold. Like, you can't train your body to say heat up faster when you go out and exercise in the cold. It just it takes time and to do a proper warm up. So, yeah, you don't get those cold adaptations. I just think it's going to be building that sort of resilience, in terms of fat? Like, the Yeah. The brown fat, possibly. I think that's, possibly a thing. That's one of the reasons actually why sometimes they say there are a few studies showing maybe doing cold after endurance training may help because it kind of enhances this mitochondrial biogenesis in brown fat. But, yeah. I'm not too aware. I guess it's speculative, you know. You you might be able to expect something better there if you do have brown fat and your body is sort of producing this passive heat, this that's uncoupled to energy expenditure in the cold. You could you could maybe tolerate it more, but, yeah, not too aware of of much there. And I don't think it's certainly not as strong as, like, what happens with heat acclimation. Yeah. Well, there's also interesting research about cold exposure due like, or, like, you know, cooling down the body during exercise and before that. Because, as I alluded earlier, you know, your body temperature rising is one of the reasons you, hit the wall or your performance declines. So you overheat doing exercise, and cooling it down actively doing the exercise has some performance enhancing benefits. Yeah. Definitely. I think there's this whole idea, and I posted something about this, a little while ago where, you know, I've heard some people say, you know, don't don't get the ice bath after exercise. Obviously, it's not good, but maybe you wanna take it beforehand. And I guess if you're just getting in there for a few seconds to sort of wake yourself up and maybe get this spike of adrenaline, I think that makes sense. But, you know, the before exercise, what does everybody do to perform better and reduce injury risk? You do a warm up because your muscles perform optimally at a certain higher temperature. So if you're going if you're doing cold for several minutes before exercise, you're cooling down your body, but your skeletal muscles are gonna be cold. It's just gonna take you longer to warm up. So that doesn't really make much sense to me. But doing precooling with some of these strategies where you are it's directly, like, targeted cooling, I think is obviously a performance enhancing strategy. So for a lot of these endurance events, ultra marathons, you'll see runners wearing vests with ice packs on them. You'll see them wearing ice packs on their head or putting ice in their hat. I think all those work, obviously, using a fan just blowing, you know, your body and cooling it down. So that would be referred to as precooling, and that certainly works. And then during as well, you know, there are several strategies you can do. Drinking cold water, obviously, putting ice on your head and continuing to do that or just dumping water on your body helps as well. And I think though there's some good evidence that there are certain places on the body that actually are more beneficial to cool because they will kind of transmit that cool to the rest of the body and lower your core body temperature. And those areas appear to be the palms of your hands, the soles of your feet, which obviously would be kind of hard to maybe do during exercise, and then like the back of your neck and your forehead. So there are all these different, like four different places where if you apply cool to those places, especially like the hands, you'll sort of get this whole body reduction in not only perceived temperature, but maybe actual temperature. And so obviously, if you perceive temperature, if you perceive to be more comfortable, you're gonna perform better. So, yeah, the strategies for cooling certainly help. The problem there is implementation. Obviously, it's it's a little bit hard to carry these things if you're out exercising. You know, you have to plan ahead. But, yeah, they certainly work, and they definitely improve performance. Yeah. It's it's this glabrous type of skin Yes. In the in the forehead and the palms of your feet and soles of your feet that you're very heat conductive. And, yeah, you can cool down your entire body or warm it up much faster by just targeting those, areas. Yeah. Yeah. I know there was, somebody who was on doctor Andrew Huberman's podcast was talking about something they were developing at Stanford, these cooling gloves. I think that they were that they were going to use, and I thought about, like, doing that during, like, one of my next races, maybe, like, putting a pair of gloves in a ice pack or something before I start and then hopping them popping them on. I don't know if it would work. I actually have this headband, that this company sent me. It's made of graphite. And so you put it around your head. And during exercise, you just dump water on it, and it will actually the water evaporates from the headband, and and it cools you down. It's it's pretty neat. A lot of triathletes use it. And it works pretty well. You just get this crazy, like, cooling sensation on your forehead that feels really good, and it Mhmm. Kind of reduces your perception of of how hot it is. Mhmm. Yeah. There's also these, like, migraine caps we have at home ourselves. So it's just, I guess, you know, just a cap you know, you just put it in the fridge, and it gets cold. And, it looks like a beanie. And and, you you it's I guess the perk is that it doesn't you you don't need to make it wet like a towel. Like a towel, you would need to make wet, and it's kind of, you know, uncomfortable a little bit. But, with this one, it's just, like a cool cool, beanie that you can also probably use during exercise. Yeah. For sure. And I think it works for strength, you know, strength exercise too. I think there's, you know, you wanna Yeah. Your body doesn't get as hot during it, but, yeah. Whether it's perceived or actually lowering your body temperature seems to improve strength performance too. Yeah. There's, like, some studies where they cool precool the palms, and they're able to do, like, more pull ups or more bench press with the weight, which is kinda interesting. Yeah. Very neat. Is is there any, like, specific, timing of, with the the heat acclimation? And I'm I'm referring more to, you mentioned earlier that the adaptations go away quite fast. If you stop doing it, so, what is, like, the timing protocol of, okay, if someone is trying to time it for some specific event? Or or if just someone does it for the health benefits, should they just keep doing it throughout the year without breaks? What's kind of that protocol in your opinion? Yeah. So, for performance, there's definitely I think you want to take timing into account. So as I mentioned, the the adaptations kind of start to occur pretty quickly. So if you start, you know, after your first two sessions, you're gonna start to get the rise in plasma volume. You're gonna get start to get those, you know, the earlier onset of sweating. You're gonna start to get the increase in, you know, red blood cells. All of that happens probably within, you know, it starts within the first couple sessions. I mean, you get this acute rise. So just one session of the sauna or heat acclimation, you get kind of a rise in EPO. You get rise in all these things that are gonna help you acclimate better. But within one to two weeks, you know, you're kinda really start to get those potent adaptations there. The timeline of losing it is probably about the same. And I would say even after a week of stopping doing it, you're sort of gonna start to lose some of those adaptations. So what I would recommend is that if you are somebody preparing for an event, again, even if you're if you're preparing for an event that's in cool weather or if it's in hot weather, I think the it kind of stands the same. I would say do your last heat acclimation session three to five days out from it. Maybe even two to three days out from it. I know before my marathon last year, I was doing I did a hot bath I think two or three days before the marathon. You don't wanna do it the day before because that's just the added extra stress. Let your body rest. But two to three days before, do your last big heat acclimation session and then that should carry you over. But you certainly don't wanna stop it two weeks out and then not do anything because you will lose out on those adaptations. So I would time it, you know, as close to you can. Don't do it as close as you can. Don't do it the day right before the day before, but two, three days before. Just keep doing your acclimation sessions up to then and then perform. For the general health benefits, do it all the time. It's a chronic thing. Right? You don't you know, because they the benefits, subside so quickly, I would just say, if you're doing it for health, if you just want overall to benefit your cardiovascular health and your performance and just a sustainable habit, yeah, I would just do it, you know, not every day, but, you know, do it every week. However often you do that and just, don't stop. Similar to kind of, you know, it's like taking supplements. You just you just take it all the time. Yeah. Yeah. And, I mean, the research about saunas is, obviously not, like, definite proof that it would prevent heart disease or reduce Alzheimer's risk, but it's pretty compelling. People who do take the sauna very frequently, they have lower rates of Alzheimer's and heart disease and overall mortality. So, yeah, I mean, I I take the sauna just for those benefits, quite regularly. And I do notice, you know, from the sauna, I've been notice, yes, better cardiovascular benefits, but also, better, yeah, muscle growth benefits, but if I take it regularly. Yeah. I know. There's, yeah, there's a lot of pushback, you know, when when people talk about those epidemiological studies on on the sauna with dementia and Alzheimer's. I mean, I think the evidence is so consistent, and you kinda get the dose response relationships and all that, which sort of strengthens that evidence. But when we also just look at the physiology of the sauna and why it might help, I mean, it is nobody's nobody's arguing that exercise isn't good for preventing dementia, preventing Alzheimer's disease, for improving cardiovascular health. Well well, the sauna is just kind of a less intense form of exercise. You're getting improved endothelial function. You're getting, you know, you're improving several aspects of heart health and, you know, improved heart health translates to better brain health. So I just think the mechanisms make so much sense there and it's like there's no way that the sauna is not is not beneficial in some of these ways. Yeah. Do you think there are any, I guess, benefits to, like, some microvascularization or something like that because, yeah, you're increasing blood flow quite substantially in the sauna and this increase in nitric oxide, vasodilation and endothelial better endothelial function. So, because, this is obviously, like, off topic, but, you know, there's research about the Viagra use as well-being, associated with lower mortality. And part of the reason might be because of the the it enhances blood flow and, kind of vasodilates the blood vessels. So is there any, I guess, similar effect from the sauna that it, just make sure circulation work better and, I guess, reduces, I guess, like, you know, let's say stagnant blood flow and stagnant blood vessels? Yeah. Definitely. I mean, I think, you know, I can't cite a specific study, but there certainly are studies showing improved macrovascular function, microvascular function, not only acutely. So after just a single sauna session, but after regular sauna sessions, couple studies in, you know, people with heart disease, heart failure showing that the sauna is beneficial there. So, yeah, I mean, you're certainly getting those those adaptations from it. And that's partially due to the heat, but partially, yes, just due to that elevated blood flow. Definitely good for blood pressure. You know, sauna certainly reduces blood pressure when you chronically use it. Pretty dramatic reduction there. So, yeah, you're just getting a host of cardiovascular benefits with it. Mhmm. Yeah. What I noticed is the sauna also increases HRV. Would the increase in HRV have any performance benefits? Would a higher HRV have performance benefits overall? I think I think so. Perhaps indirectly, just because if you're, you know, better on anomic regulation, I think you're just gonna be able to, and that perhaps explains some of the better recovery with that as well. You're just, you know, able to not only regulate kind of this sort of parasympathetic sympathetic activation with that, but just your your baseline sympathetic activity might be lower. And I think overall, that's just going to sort of indirectly help with that performance. So I could certainly see that there. Yeah. And as well as, like, the benefits on sleep, you know, a lot of it's anecdotal, I think. But a lot of people report that if they do the sauna in the afternoon, they're gonna sleep better at night. I've I've found that. You know, I sleep pretty well after as long as you don't do too close to bedtime, I think. I certainly get better sleep. So there are, I think, a lot of ways that the Sonic can indirectly, promote performance as well. HRV and, you know, better sleep. Gotcha. Yeah. How long would it be, like, recommended to stay in the sauna to not overdo it, but to get the benefits? That will that will obviously depend on the temperature, but just say, you know, the standard sauna is gonna be 170 Fahrenheit to maybe one eighty five Fahrenheit, something like that. I would say, you know, if you go on the epidemiological studies, it's fifteen minutes seems to be the sweet spot. Fifteen minutes, like, five times a week. That's kind of where you see that maximum reduction in disease risk, you know, cardiovascular health, dementia risk, things like that. I would say twenty to thirty minutes and probably no more than that. You know, you could go to forty five, but at that point, you're really getting, you know, a a lot of a stress, and I don't think that's probably necessary. So I think twenty minutes minimum, thirty minutes maybe maximum, do that two to three times per week. I do definitely think there's a minimum, though. And and I don't know how how you do it when you take the sauna, but I don't start my timer until I start sweating. I think it's cheating if you start the timer right when you get in the sauna. So I like to spend twenty to thirty minutes actually physically sweating. I know a lot of people don't do that, but I just think you kind of want to hit this threshold of body temperature. And not, you know, there's not an exact body temperature, but somewhere, you know, once you hit that threshold, I think, is when you kind of start to get those adaptations. So if you're getting in the sauna and you start your timer and you're in there for twenty minutes, sometimes I'm in the sauna for twenty minutes or ten minutes, I'm not even sweating yet. So I think that once your body starts sweating, that's kind of when all those, you know, this is when the adaptations are starting. And I like to stay in there for twenty to thirty minutes after that. So that would kinda be the time frame recommended. You don't have to do it once you start sweating, but I would not immediately start it right when you get in. I think that's, you'd probably losing out on some of the gains there. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. I guess, you know, the the more heat adapted you are, the more heat you need to facilitate further adaptation. I guess, yeah, to maintain, you can get away with the smaller doses, But, to keep enhancing that, then, yeah, you would need to keep keep going. I think so. I I think though that I don't know if you really I mean, you obviously get these heat acclimation, you know, adaptations when you get in the sauna, but I'm not sure. Unlike exercise, I don't really think with the sauna, you maybe need to increase keep increasing the dose as much to keep getting the benefits because it's hot all the time and, like, your body's gonna respond in a similar way eventually. Like, there's just not a point where you're gonna get in the sauna and it's you can stay in there for two hours because you're so acclimated, I think. Right. So you don't adapt to it as much as you do exercise. So if you just wanna do twenty to thirty minutes, you'll you'll keep you don't get, like, a plateau where, oh, I'm not benefiting from the sauna anymore because I've been doing thirty minutes three times a week for years. You're still gonna keep getting those benefits, unlike exercise where at a certain point, you're gonna kind of plateau in your benefits. You need to add more exercise. I don't really think that that happens the same way with the sauna. Gotcha. What about electrolytes? So if you're, you know, sweating more, you're in a heat more, you, at least, you know, you need to pay more attention to, hydration and electrolytes. So, during this heat acclimation phase when someone is doing the sauna more and training in the heat, etcetera, would they need to, you know, I guess, drink more water or drink more electrolytes, add some salt to the water? More water for sure. And, yes, I think I think it's probably smart adding electrolytes in there. You know, I'm I use electrolytes myself. I, you know, I think there are some people who maybe don't wanna use them, and I don't think that they're necessary. But if you are sweating more, and sweating a lot and you're also trying to exercise, then you certainly, I think, need to be replacing those electrolytes. So, yeah, I would say, you know, if you're starting to have the sauna, you know, drinking drinking to thirst and drinking water to thirst, but maybe adding some extra electrolytes in your water, sodium, potassium, magnesium could definitely be beneficial. Gotcha. There's also a very interesting or, you know, arguably, you could also think of dehydration as a form of this hormesis that, has performance benefits. But, you know, if you're used to training with, you know, in the example of heat, in a hotter climate, then you're gonna be better at a normal climate. But with hydration and dehydration, do you think there is any benefits to, okay, I'm gonna train slightly dehydrated so that when I am fully hydrated, my body will, I guess, like, be, more adapted to it. Yeah. And I actually, you know, I kind of do that myself. So Okay. Specifically with Asana, I wouldn't I wouldn't say training. So if you're gonna go down on a run or something, I mean, you don't really wanna train dehydrated, I think, because, you know, you're you wanna perform well during the session, and if you're dehydrated, you're not gonna have your maximum output. But in the sauna, I actually think that obviously be safe when you're doing it, but I would say try to do the sauna without having any water in it. Because when you the the dehydration is actually one of those signals that then forces your body to sort of up regulate all of those processes. Like, when you become dehydrated, when you're sweating more, that forces your body to say, oh, we gotta uptake, you know, we gotta uptake our, production of, say, EPO, and we gotta product increase our plasma volume expansion. The plasma expansion happens because the dehydration is a stressor. As you mentioned, it's this hormesis. So if you're in the sauna and you're chugging a gallon of water and really not not letting your body reach that dehydration point, like dehydration is kind of the point of the sauna sometimes. So I would say, yeah. I think it's beneficial to sort of train that dehydration, in a way. So I go in the sauna. I don't drink water until I get out. Mhmm. Yeah. Definitely. Don't take, like, a plastic bottle or No. We just don't take a plastic bottle. I was in the sauna a couple weeks ago and there's this guy in there who had, like, a plastic gallon jug or something like that. I'm like, it was almost melting in there. It was it was so hot. So and, you know, the microplastics ingesting all that stuff. You wanna you wanna avoid that. So Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. But doing the runs. So, like, you know, a lot of people do fasted running, fasted cardio for, you know usually they do this for fat loss or they think think it's gonna be good for fat loss. But, what about, like, I guess, water dehydrated running so that, you know, you go out running on a on an empty stomach with no water? I think it can I think it can help, but maybe, again, more so from the psychological sort of perspective? I mean, you want to conditions aren't always going to be optimal. If you're in a competition or something, you may, you know, not have water stopped everywhere. You might not be able to carry water along with you. So I would say do you you sort of need to train your body and train your mind to perform better, maybe slightly dehydrated? Again, I think it depends on the purpose of the session. I think fasted training has some benefits. I'm not gonna do it all the time because there are key sessions during the week where I wanna fuel my body so that I can have a high output. But then there are some sessions where, oh, this is a easy run and it's okay if I'm not optimally fueled. I might do that fast. So I think the same kind of goes with hydration where if I'm really looking to perform perfectly during this session, I'm going to adequately hydrate. But if it's one that's, you know, not a session that doesn't have much consequence, you might be okay if you're slightly dehydrated. I mean, if the 2% rule is kind of true, you know, you'll often hear sight said that, you know, once you lose 2% of your body weight, that's sort of when performance starts to decline. People look at 2% like it is, you know, a very small number, but that's a lot. If you lose 2% of your body weight in water I mean, I weigh, you know, I weigh sixty eight kilograms, about a hundred and forty six pounds. So if I lose 2% of my body weight, that's a that's a pretty substantial amount of weight. I mean, that's three to four pounds of, like, water. And, so that's pretty substantial. And so it takes a lot to really reach that, 2% dehydration. And unless you're exercising for multiple hours in the heat, you may not even, like, reach that point. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. Are there any sex differences between men and women? Should the women be more careful with this or, are there no no difference? In terms of sort of the heat acclimation type of stuff? Yeah. Yeah. And maybe, you know, the dehydration maybe as well. Yeah. Yeah. Not that I'm aware of. I mean, there doesn't seem to be, you know, a biological, physiological reason why why men and women would would want to respond any differently. And so, you know, like, not aware of of any data to suggest that. So I think women can do heat acclimation stuff just as just as much and frequently as, the same protocol sort of as men. Mhmm. Gotcha. But speaking of, you know, general longevity, there's, you know, we mentioned already these studies on saunas and health better health outcomes. Do you think that so should, like, this kind of heat acclimation, whether that be with regular exercise or, or like this heat adapted exercise or saunas or this dehydration training? Does any of them do you think should be, I guess, part of a longevity protocol for regular people? Yeah. I mean, I think certainly exercise should be. That's key. I don't think the sauna is a replacement then for exercise in that aspect, but certainly, you know, we just talked about how they have additive performance benefits, but also additive health benefits. I mean, there's, you know, on the first podcast that you and I did, we talked all about the association of VO two max with longevity. So if someone is truly looking to optimize their VO two max, well, I think that combining exercise with sauna is is probably the, you know, the best way to do that. So, yes, you can get an extra, you know, increasing your VO2 max, which, you know, theoretically could could then kind of improve your longevity. But also just the additive benefits on just some of this physiology that we talked about. So, I mean, cardiovascular health, cardiovascular disease is like the number one detractor of longevity. It's what most people die of. So improving cardiovascular health by combining those modalities, I think, could be also another strategy. So I think that, you know, a lot of people don't have access to the sauna, but many people do. So I think combining it with exercise is sort of this this awesome longevity protocol. Or again, if you don't have the sauna and have access to a hot bath, you could combine exercise with a hot bath sort of in a similar way. I just think overall, it is it's helping you kind of get more out of the exercise routine that you have, whether that's strength or endurance training. And so, yeah, it's not all about performance for some people. They just wanna live longer and live better, but I think combining the two can can help people do that. Yeah. I guess, what about the cold? I think I see my impression of the cold research is that there's much less longevity research about the cold than for the sauna. Yeah. There really isn't. And anything that I've seen is kind of in these is in mouse models of cold. I we certainly don't have any data on people who regularly and just because maybe it's a new newer phenomenon, but people who regularly do ice baths or cold plunges. Is there this association with longevity? We don't have that data like we do for the sauna. So it's kind of speculation. I think that there's just so much mechanistic possibility that is stated with the with the cold. Like, why this should improve longevity because of, you know, the brown fat or the mitochondria and but not a lot of that. I mean, there's some mechanistic studies in mice, but overall, there's just there's really not a signal that, it would improve, like, kind of longevity for any reason. Also, I just also think that so if we just go back to looking at the physiology again, there's a lot of ways to explain why why is the sauna going to improve longevity? Because it improves your cardiovascular health and your brain health. But the the cold doesn't do that. It doesn't affect the cardiovascular system in the same way. It just doesn't really have these tangible health benefits. In terms of your body, you know, brain and cardiovascular health that the sauna would. There's certainly the potential for some of the cellular signaling stuff, but, yeah, I'm just really not I'm just really not as bullish about the cold for longevity. It kind of sounds good, but if we really are just looking at the evidence, there's there's not really a lot to to to support it. Yeah. Yeah. I agree that the cold has some like, the most research is about lowering inflammation and maybe strengthening the immune system, but, yeah, that that's pretty much it. You know, there is, at least, you know, these, animal I guess, you know, if you look at the longest one of the longest living animals on the world and there are these cold, living sea animals like whales. There was actually a recent study on these bow bowhead whales that, they have this very efficient DNA repair through through one of the cold short proteins, which pretty much, yeah, reduces their DNA mutations and, helps with DNA repair. So that yeah. I mean, there's, you know, hypothetically some benefits to lower lower living temperatures. But, yeah, the human human research right now is much more, limited. Well, I think well, I think a colder living temperature makes sense, but I'm not I don't think that regularly taking cold baths is going to mean that you're walking around at a lower body temperature. I think the only way to do that would probably be through chronic caloric restriction or something like that. I know Brian Johnson is you know, he said he's, like, lowered his butt the average body temperature by, like, two two degrees Fahrenheit or something like that. So, yeah, if you're colder throughout life, if you have a suppressed metabolism, that potentially has a longevity benefit. But again, to get there, you have to, you know, eat 500 calories a day and be cold all the time and have suppressed thyroid. So I'm not sure that's, like, the best way to to live either. Yeah. But what about then, like, living in a warmer temperature? Would that be then harmful? What do you think? Or Yeah. So it's interesting you say that because there actually are you know, I just said there was no evidence, but there is some data that people living in colder climates actually live longer than people living in warmer climates. But there's a little bit of confounding there with regards to, you know, socioeconomic kind of things. A lot of the warmer climates are closer to the Equator where you don't get maybe nations that are, you know, as developed with better health care. So there's some confounding variables there. But, yeah, I think living in a colder place, certainly there's an association with longevity. Yeah. And that's kinda interesting. So maybe maybe, I mean, there would be benefits to just just acute fluctuations in the temperature. I guess that is a more important aspect because, you know, in the modern world, we live in a very climate stable world. You can just, regulate the temperature in your room. You're never really shivering. You're never really, that hot. Unless in I mean, maybe in Europe, you know, there's no ACs that much. So, there are more fluctuations in the summer and winter, but, but in still most of, let's say, developed countries, the fluctuations in temperature are much more scarce, and it's gonna be more stable. So you're you know, because these, yeah, fluctuations are these small positive hormesis similar to, you know, intermittent fasting or similar to, exercise. So we just need a bit more of these positive stressors that, make our body, stronger. I agree. Yeah. And, you know, I don't mean to say that I'm I'm not against the cold by any reason, for any reason. I think it's great to expose yourself to cold, a lot. I think the benefits are overblown, on social media and things like that, but it's great. I mean, it makes you feel great. Obviously, anybody who's used it. So, yeah, we need these we need to get the body really hot at times. We need to get it really cold at times. I think that fluctuation is is certainly important rather than this yeah. Like you said, this just climate controlled environment that everybody lives in all the time. We need these swings in in temperature, which is why people love to do sauna, why people love to do cold baths. They make us feel good, and they definitely it has some benefits as well. Gotcha. What what are you, let's say, otherwise thinking should be done more in this area? Like, you know, let's say, sauna research or heat acclimation research or something like that. Yeah. I would I'm pretty interested these days in you know, I we talked a little bit about the hot baths, but there's just, I I would like to see more research just on the additive effects on performance. Like, there's some data out there, but it's not very strong with regards to endurance training or strength training. I would just really like to see, you know, I think combined exercise with sauna interventions for not only performance outcomes, but sort of just these health outcomes and maybe, you know, I think soon, hopefully, maybe some longitudinal studies on sauna, on cold. Maybe just especially sauna because there's so much, you know, skepticism regarding those, you know, studies from Finland showing the association with longevity. But I would love to see maybe like longer term studies, couple years long where they're using the sauna and correlating that to say maybe some of these disease outcomes or proxies for disease outcomes, you know, does do people who use it, you know, over, eight to ten year, like, like, follow-up period, do they have less heart attacks? Do they have less strokes? I think if we have data like that to support the sauna, it would sort of, you know, it would strengthen kind of the evidence that we already have. So I would love to see that. But for me, personally, I'm really interested in, like, can we use the sauna as sort of this add on to strength training, to endurance exercise, to get some of these benefits? Because there's a few studies out there, but I would like to see more in trained people, but also just general people training for health. I think I would like to see see more of that. So hopefully some of those studies are being done. Yeah. Absolutely. I agree. Yeah. I'm a big big believer in the sauna, but Mhmm. Some of the skeptics would like to get some more, higher quality studies. Well, yeah. Well, this was a very interesting conversation and, you know, where can people learn more about you and your work? I'm pretty active on x. People can find me at b underscore holmer, just like my last name, h o l m e r. I post on there, a lot of science stuff, some personal stuff, but that's where I'm most active. And then I write a weekly newsletter on Substack. It's called Physiologically Speaking. If people go to physiologicallyspeaking.com, they can sign up for it there. I send a newsletter every Friday about a scientific study, and then I'll post a couple videos maybe during the week. I'll send you know, I'm posting my marathon training right now because I'm prepping for a marathon. So I'll post a bunch of stuff on there. But the main the main thing there is the weekly newsletter that people, if they're listening to this, they'll certainly be interested in anything I write about on there. So those are two places they can find me. You know, if you wanna follow me, reach out, say, hey. I also love chatting with people. You know, if you have question on endurance training, sauna, something like that, feel free to reach out. I I'll typically answer all those questions if I can. Yeah. We'll put the links in the show notes. And, yeah. Last time I asked, what's this one piece of advice or habit you wish you adopted sooner? Is there something you have changed about that opinion? Yeah. I'm trying to remember what I said. Did I say walking? I think I might have said walking. I put it in the habit. I feel like that's still somebody I was on a podcast yesterday and somebody asked me that question and I said the same thing. And not for the fitness benefits. I think there's a lot of people saying, like, walking is the best form of exercise, and and I'm not sure I really buy into that. But just walking from the aspect of breaking up physical, physical inactivity during the day, walking for mental health benefits, walking for recovery. It's a habit that I wish when early on in life, I sort of would have adopted, and sort of not looked down upon. And also cross training, maybe that would maybe be something that I've changed my mind on since you and I last talked. I do I I run a lot still, but, I get on the bike a lot and do some cross training, which I'm finding has has a lot of benefits. I think when I was a younger runner, I just ran all the time and as much as I could, and that necessarily wasn't wasn't a good thing. So I think what people could take from that is that, you know, you have your main activity, but try to supplement it with things that might be a little bit outside of the thing you like doing most, to add some variety. Yeah. What about walking in the heat? Would then be, Yeah. It it's interesting you say that because this this summer, that's something that I did a lot. Instead of doing, say, like, maybe two exercise sessions in a day, I would I would run-in the morning. And then in the afternoon, when it was really hot, it would be a 100 degrees Fahrenheit here or even above that in Austin, Texas. I would go out and do a walk. I think that's a great way of sort of active heat acclimation, but you're not exercising super hard so it's not too much of a stress. That's great, I think. Mhmm. Gotcha. Well, yeah. It was great to talk with you and, yeah. I'll see you around. Yeah. Thanks, team. This is great.