One of the pharmaceuticals that show promise in being beneficial for longevity in humans are SGLT two inhibitors. SGLT two or sodium glucose cotransporter two inhibitors are diabetes drugs that work by blocking glucose reabsorption by the kidneys, resulting in lower blood sugar and diuretic effects. However, SGLT two inhibitor longevity benefits appear to be beyond just lowering blood sugar because metformin has failed to be associated with longevity in humans, although it also lowers blood sugar. In this video, I'm going to look at into the research of SGLT two inhibitors and why they might be beneficial for longevity. I'll also cover metformin. Subscribe for the latest updates in antiaging research. Let's start with the 2024 study on half a million UK individuals that analyzed the effects of 406 medications on mortality. Most drugs were associated with increased mortality because people who take drugs have some diseases that kill them. However, there were a few drugs associated with reduced mortality, and SGLD two inhibitors were number one with a thirty six percent lower association with mortality. Interestingly, although metformin is also a diabetes drug and it lowers blood sugar, it had no effect on mortality. Metformin has this aura that it's a longevity drug and it will also make non diabetics live longer, but the evidence doesn't suggest it at all. In 2014, an observational study suggested that diabetics taking metformin could live 15% longer than non diabetics not taking metformin. But a recent 2022 reassessment of that 2014 study found that in case control pairs, using Metformin was associated with increased mortality across all levels of cumulative use. Metformin use among diabetics does reduce all cause mortality and heart disease events, but not in non diabetics. What about SGLT two inhibitors? SGLT two inhibitors lower long term mortality in diabetics with or without kidney disease and irrespective of GLP one agonists. However, a 2022 meta analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials saw that SGLD2 inhibitors reduced cardiovascular mortality in diabetic patients with heart failure. In non diabetics, they reduced the risk of hospitalization for heart failure without effects on cardiovascular mortality and stroke. Another 2021 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials saw that SGLD two inhibitors improve cardiovascular outcomes in patients without diabetes with heart failure. They also showed positive metabolic outcomes in weight and blood pressure. Obviously, we don't have long term randomized controlled trials on healthy non diabetic individuals taking SGLD two inhibitors, but SGLD two inhibitors appear to lower mortality in heart failure patients and diabetics. In people without diabetes, they improve metabolic health and reduce cardiovascular risk. However, in the interventions testing program, which tests the lifespan effects of molecules in mice, one of the s g l d two inhibitors, canagliflozin, was seen to extend median survival of male mice by fourteen percent and ninetieth percentile survival by nine percent. The ITP is considered the gold standard program for testing the life extension effects of different molecules in mice. Metformin on the other hand was not seen to extend mouse lifespan in the ITP. It did so only when combined with rapamycin. So based on animal and human research, metformin has no effects on lifespan. It will reduce the risk of mortality in diabetics, but diabetics have a shorter lifespan to begin with. SGLT two inhibitors on the other hand do extend lifespan in mice, but we don't have evidence from non diabetic humans yet. Out of SGLD two inhibitors and metformin, SGLD two inhibitors have a lot more potential. There's a difference in metformin and SGLD two inhibitors. Metformin decreases glucose production by the liver and increases insulin sensitivity. SGLD two inhibitors, on the other hand, block glucose reabsorption in the kidneys and you excrete more glucose in urine. There are several other systemic effects that happen with SGLD two inhibitors. They also stimulate several longevity pathways like AMPK, PGC one alpha, autophagy, and lower mTOR signaling. Now, metformin does the same things. So the reason why SGLD two inhibitors appear to provide a greater mortality risk than metformin is because SGLD two inhibitors have systemic effects on the kidneys and heart, whereas metformin is mostly lowering blood sugar. And just lowering blood sugar doesn't appear to be enough. The biggest downside to s e l d two inhibitors is their cost. They cost around $400 a month, which is significantly more expensive compared to the $20 a month of metformin. The most commonly prescribed s e l d two inhibitors include canagliflozin, tapagliflozin, empagliflozin, and ertugliflozin. You need a prescription for all of these. Now, pharmaceuticals often have side effects which is why it's not a smart idea to just start taking them as a healthy person. Metformin for example has been seen to reduce v o two max and testosterone levels which are also important for longevity. Metformin also inhibits the mitochondrial adaptations to aerobic exercise so that's quite bad for an otherwise healthy person. SGLD two inhibitors on the other hand haven't found to be associated with a small increase in peak VO2, which is the opposite of metformin. However, this has been seen in patients of chronic heart failure. So we don't know what's the effects in otherwise healthy people. In healthy men, SGLD two inhibitors haven't been seen to affect testosterone levels either. All of this suggests that SGL d two inhibitors have much fewer side effects on health span than metformin. However, SGL d two inhibitors still have some side effects such as genital and urinary tract infections, nausea, fatigue, increased urination, dehydration, and potential low blood pressure or risk of amputation. SGLD two inhibitors are associated with a three to five fold increased risk of fungal genital infections. So you gotta be careful with that, and it might not be suitable for immunocompromised individuals. At the end of the day, it's too early to say if SGLD two inhibitors are going to extend lifespan in humans, especially those who don't have diabetes. I think people who are younger than 50 years old and otherwise healthy, they kinda don't need to start taking s e l d two inhibitors or other blood sugar medications. They're already healthy, and they're not that old that their blood sugar levels would be compromised. However, at older age above 60 and 70, your blood sugar and kidney function will already begin to decline. So what's quote unquote normal for a 70 year old can be categorized as prediabetes or early stage kidney disease in your twenties or thirties. Maybe at the age of 70 or above, you could benefit from SGLD two inhibitors, but you need to discuss these things with your doctor. Regardless, SGLT two inhibitors show promise for being geroprotective and with longevity benefits, at least based on observational studies and animal studies. We just need more long term studies to see if there are any long term harmful side effects. Pharmaceuticals can be useful for some people, but you also need to have your lifestyle optimized. Check out my evidence based longevity routine for all the steps you need to take to get healthy.