So if you get poisoned with cyanide, you destroy your complex four on the mitochondria. And if you have destruction of complex four, you will die, most likely. But what methylene blue does, it can compensate for complex four destruction by by maintaining some energy production even in in that state, which is a very challenging state. So it has the capacity for you to make energy, so increase ATP production. At the same time, it also works as a this other aspect, the reloc cycler, is it can act directly as an antioxidant. Scott, welcome back to the show. It's good to see you, Sam. It's been a it's been a minute. Well, it's been five years, which is a long minute. Oh, that's it. Yeah. Yeah. Like last time, I had you on a podcast, we talked about hyperbaric oxygen therapy, and, it has been quite a while since we had a discussion. Today, I wanted to bring you on to talk about, methylene blue because, you're also, like, an expert on that, and it's I've seen it become quite popular over the last year or two, on social media that different people are talking about. It's called, like, magic bullet and, like, a very Yeah. Powerful supplement for different things. So, yeah, we can, have a deep dive into all things methylene blue and how does it work. So, yeah, maybe we can start with, you know, what is methylene blue and, you know, there's also, like, these headlines that is this, fish tank cleaner. So, yeah, what is it? Yeah. So, I mean, it's so much to unpack here with methylene blue, but you did mention something about a magic bullet. And, actually, methylene blue as it was actually discovered back in the eighteen seventies as textile dye before it became a medical, medical compound used in treatment for like infection, which we'll talk about. It was, it got a name of, well, actually called the magic bullet. And the reason for that is because you could give very high doses of methylene blue to somebody and it would kill pathogens, but it would not kill normal cells. And as a result of that, and that's kind of like the this is before chemotherapy. This is before we really had any treatments for any major illnesses. We there's no antibiotics, no anti antimicrobials at all. And so Nineteenth century. Right? What's that? It was the nineteenth century, I think. Yeah. Exactly. So nothing blue was, was created. It's a it was as a synthetic dye in the in the eighteen seventies. And it was used, to dye things blue, including blue jeans, actually. And somehow, they realized that it treated malaria at these high doses and at the same time didn't kill or harm normal cells, and that's how it got the name of a magic bullet. And in 1897, it was the first drug registered with the FDA here in The United States, at that time. And it was actually for malaria and really was the only antimicrobial around until the 1950s when penicillin came around after world war II. So it was used for urinary tract infections, fungal infections, viral infections used for, specific specifically gram negative bacteria. And it actually would combine with things like sunlight and actually work better. And we now know that it's a combination of red light or near infrared light specifically in combination with methylene blue has a synergistic effect, for killing bugs when you use high strength or high doses of methylene blue in combination with high strength lasers, specifically with the near infrared light spectrum. So it was used as an antimicrobial and when antimicrobials came around, like your penicillins of the world, people stopped using as much methylene blue. And there's a couple different reasons for that. One of the main reasons is that methylene blue, increases the amount of so it actually concentrates in the urine when you excrete it and so when you urinate, you have blue urine when you actually urinate methylene with methylene blue on board. At very high doses, actually it will turn some of your other secretions blue as well, including your poop. And actually, at very, very high dose, like over like three milligrams per kilogram. So where methylene blue got its kind of angle from being from a human population is actually starting being used in fish tanks in the 1950s and 60s. And now until this day is still used in fish tanks to be a fish tank cleaner in quotes. But it's really cleaning the fish, not the tank itself. And so anybody that is an aquarium person will know this more than I do actually. But so you take out the fish, you actually treat the fish with methylene blue and this treats their fungal infections and all the other things that can happen in there. So that's how it got this and then it's still used to this day. And then, you know, there were some funny headlines in the beginning of the pandemic, Sam, that I think you know about. It was like, there was this one headline that biohackers are drinking fish tank cleaner to reverse their age, which was it's a great clickbait headline that would be good for eyeballs, right? So that's what they used. And of course, you don't want to be drinking fish tank cleaner because fish tank cleaner is not going to be the kind of methylene blue that you want. You want methylene blue that is clean, that's been tested, that is free of heavy metals because what actually can happen in during the manufacturing process of methylene blue is you can get contamination with, mercury, lead, arsenic, and cadmium. So even pharmaceutical grade methylene blue can actually be contaminated. You have to be super careful, but especially fish tank cleaner, industrial grade methylene blue. But Right. The key is really clean sources and understanding that there's different dosing depending on if you want to have treatment for infection or if you wanna treat for, you know, or mitochondrial optimization, which is really where the biohacking optimization performance mitochondrial supports spaces kind of where we use mostly mostly methylene blue. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. The antibacterial and antiviral effects are one of the main ones that I've seen people talk about. So, like, does it have, like, any, like, immune system strengthening effects or something like that as well? So or, like, why does it have is it just purely, like, just antibacterial or does it, like, support immune system in some way? So what it does, if you take over about a milligram per kilogram or higher of methylene blue, what it does is increase the production in our cells of hydrogen peroxide. And it does that as a result of actually binding with oxygen and causing the hydrogen peroxide production. And hydrogen peroxide, people get scared about this, but our actually, our cells make hydrogen peroxide to kill bugs, to kill viruses, bacteria, fungus. And so as a result of that, it's directly anti microbial as it relates to increasing the amount of hydrogen peroxide production. In addition, there's a lot of other positives with this production. It actually can break up biofilms. So biofilms are these films that are created with like on our teeth. We see like our teeth biofilm. When we have that, when we wake up in the morning, our GI system has biofilms. Our urinary tract has biofilms. Almost everything has biofilms. And these are films where it's protective layers, but if you get nasty bacteria in these layers, they're difficult, or fungus or especially bacteria and fungus, they're difficult to address because they're being kind of, they're hiding inside this biofilm. And so what methylene blue can do with the production of hydrogen peroxide, primarily is that it can break up these biofilms. And so in addition to not only so it's really like hydrogen peroxide focused because it can kill bugs directly. It can kill or break up biofilms. And at the same time, it's an immune system modulator as a result of increasing hydrogen peroxide. So at lower doses at, like, four, eight, sixteen milligrams, it's not so much an antimicrobial as it's a mitochondrial support. But at these higher doses, you get this anti infective capacity. Mhmm. Yeah. That's very interesting. Yeah. The your your cells making hydro hydrogen peroxide is, yeah, quite, interesting. Yeah. They do. Yeah. It goes to show that yeah. Like, a lot of these your body has a lot of, like, I guess, ingredients that, it makes itself, as well in response to different infections. But, you know, it was made in the nineteenth century or discovered and, you know, back then there was no, you know, penicillin, no antibiotics. And, yeah, I guess, yeah, that would have made sense why it was considered like a magic bullet at that time. But, yeah, like, I'm just playing like a devil's advocate. Like, how does it compare to, like, something else more powerful nowadays, in terms of the antibacterial effects? Obviously, there's much more powerful antibiotics, out there now. So, and, like, what what would what would, like, doctors use methylene blue methylene blue nowadays with, much more powerful drugs existing? Yeah. What's interesting is that the first approved use for methylene blue was malaria. And as we described, methylene blue became out of favor when we had these all these new drugs that came out. And malaria, unfortunately, is actually now resistant to a lot of the, medications that we use against it. And Mhmm. Methylene blue is coming back as a drug to use for malaria as a result of this. The the interesting thing about methylene blue is that there really have been no resistance patterns described for it. Most antibiotics over time, these bugs will become resistant to the antibiotics themselves just out of pure numbers and how fast that they divide. But the mechanism of being hydrogen peroxide production prevents there being a resistance pattern associated with it. So, there are certainly more powerful antimicrobials than methylene blue, but, the use of it really kind of dropped precipitously in the nineteen fifties. So there's not a lot of great studies on the use of methylene blue for urinary tract infections in in in like the modern era, really what it comes down to, because it hasn't, you know, been used in this capacity. So it's hard to compare it sort of apples to apples. What I will typically do with my patients and the ones that I work with for an infectious perspective is that we're not just using methylene blue on its own. We're typically using it in combination with other antimicrobials to make those antimicrobials work better. Now, in some cases, I will use methylene blue on its own if it's something that we know has a direct effect. So we have there's good studies on the types of bacteria that methylene blue is very good at addressing and the types of fungus that's very good at addressing, like gram negative bacteria specifically, which are common in urinary tract infections, for example. So if it's something that we know methylene blue has a good track record against, also some of these viruses as well, interestingly enough, it's also been shown as an antiviral, even for COVID like infections or these coronaviruses, especially. So if there's relatively good data, then we could think about using it directly as the primary treatment. But if it's like, if there's a bacterial component, we have to be very careful just to make sure that they have to be very reliable. So some of my urinary tract infection patients will give them methylene blue at high doses for several days. And if they're not, if they're not better, then we'll start using antimicrobials and that kind of thing. But in essence, the dosing for acute infection somewhere between one to two milligrams per kilogram on average. It could be higher for things like malaria, but in essence, it's around that dosing. And then from how they respond, depending on, if it's bacterial, fungal, or viral, depending if where you're gonna use some synergistic things together. But oftentimes that's what we're doing. Mhmm. Would it have any prophylactic effects that preemptively taken, it would reduce your risk of infections? So we don't have any good data here yet to know. It's amazing. It's been around over a hundred years, but we don't know because if if something like methylene blue has been around that long, nobody has, a blockbuster drug that they can use at the end and make billions of dollars. Right? But there has been some there are some products out there that use low doses of methylene blue as a preventative for urinary tract infections, actually. And so there is some data on the prevention of UTIs in patients that have a a propensity of forgetting them. So usually it's women, menopausal, chronic urinary tract infections. So I've seen a lot of good responses in my own personal practice using it with patients at low doses regularly to prevent, urinary tract infections. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices, which are the bond charge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes. They do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin antiaging, hormone optimization, pain management and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes. Especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the bond charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most rhella turbidizers don't have the right wavelengths of light, which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Bond Charge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research. And they also have a near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to 1charge.com and use the code SIIM, s I I m, for a 15% discount. Another thing that, it's very known for is, like, the mitochondrial function. So it has benefits on the mitochondrial, function and, stuff. So, yeah, what can you tell us about that? So in chemistry class, many of us played around with methylene blue, at least when I was in chemistry class. And that's actually where it got a lot of that's where it's been used for almost a century as well. And the reason why methylene blue is used is it's this very blue stain, as we were talking about, and it stains a part of your cell, you know, called your mitochondria. And it wasn't initially known exactly what was happening there, but now we have a really good sense of what's happening inside the mitochondria when methylene moves around. And the cool thing about it is it's something called the redox cycler. So redox cycler means that it can both donate and accept electrons. And our mitochondria, as you know, some very well, is that it requires electrons to create a proton gradient so that you can make ATP. Okay. And so what methylene blue can do is it can supply electrons to the electron transport chain and compensate for any damage that you might have there. And I guess the bigger picture here is that if you have mitochondrial dysfunction, you have significant symptoms in places where you have the most mitochondria, right? You have the most mitochondria in your sperm, in your ovaries, your brain, heart, liver, your musculoskeletal tissue and those are the main locations. And so symptomatically, that's where people are going to have the issues when it comes to mitochondrial dysfunction. And oftentimes, this is because one of the complexes on the mitochondria isn't working as optimally as it can. And what methylene blue can do is it can bypass any damaged complex that there might be on the mitochondria and supply electrons to other parts of the electron transport chain to maintain that gradient, maintain that proton gradient so that you can maintain energy production. Maybe it's not perfect, but you can maintain energy production or recalibrate or compensate for the lack of energy production and make more of it to some degree while you have methylene blue on board. And so the most common, well not one of the most common, but one of the ways that methylene blue is still used and is thought of as on like the World Health Organization's list of essential medications is for cyanide poisoning, actually. So if you get poisoned with cyanide, you destroy your complex four on the mitochondria. And if you have destruction of complex four, you will die, most likely, depending on how much cyanide you got and etcetera, etcetera. But what methylene blue does, it can compensate for complex four destruction by maintaining some energy production even in that state, which is a very challenging state. So it has the capacity for you to make energy, so increase ATP production. At the same time, it also works as a this other aspect of the redox cycler is it can act directly as an antioxidant, so picking up free electrons. So when you make energy, ATP, you make some element of reactive oxygen species that are important, but too many can be stressful to the system. So it can act directly as an antioxidant or it can act indirectly as an antioxidant because we talked about hydrogen peroxide production. Right? At the higher levels of methylene blue that you give, you make more hydrogen peroxide and this increases your what's called your NRF two pathway, which you know very well, that increases your production of glutathione. Interesting. Yeah. Like, there's not a lot of things that could maintain that energy production in that cyanide, poisoning state. Yeah. Nothing else can that we know of. And so it's Was it like a cell study where they found that? Or Yeah. Yeah. So it's a cellular study where they did it. They, but you they they use it in it actually is used as an antidote for cyanide poisoning. Now, again, this is not very common. What's more common in the medical world is something called methemoglobinemia which is where your hemoglobin cannot bind oxygen because of the state of iron. And what methylene blue can do is it can change the redox state of iron so that you can bind oxygen again and then you can maintain energy production. So it's uncommon, but it does happen in carbon monoxide poisoning is one place where you can see it. Another one is where is actually if you overdose on like on some illegal drugs, if you're like it's called huffing. If you huff things, you like inhale, it's got this it's called sodium nitrite and sodium nitrite can actually change and make it hard for you to carry oxygen. So so methylene blue allows you that redox change of the iron to allow you to carry easier the oxygen. And then it also helps dump off the oxygen in your tissue as well so you can get more oxygen delivered a tissue as well. So it's it's it's got a lot of different mechanisms in in enhancing energy production. Is it like a natural compound then? Like, where where did they discover this, magic bullet? So it is a fully synthetic compound, and so that's important. I know people get worried about things that are fully synthetic, but it's not like fully natural things are always good for us either. Yeah. We don't live in a natural world anymore, and so sometimes we need synthetic things to help us out. And and methylene blue is one of those kinds of things, but it is manufactured, and that's why getting good quality stuff is really, really important because it can the manufacturing process, as I mentioned earlier, you can have contamination with heavy metals and that it's obviously detrimental to your mitochondrial function to have lead, mercury, cadmium and arsenic hanging around. And so that's why it's really important you find good sources of it. And not only is it a pharmaceutical grade source, but also that the company is willing to provide you the certificate of analysis with what is going on in the product as well. Yeah. Absolutely. You mentioned sunlight and near infrared. So, how does that tie in with the mitochondria? So the lower doses of of methylene blue, like four, eight, sixteen, twenty five milligrams, these synergize with near infrared light in an an energy enhancing sort of way, where near infrared light around 680 nanometers in in wavelength, donates electrons directly to complex four in the mitochondria and methylene blue under normal circumstances when there is relatively optimized mitochondrial function, there's no need for it to compensate for dysfunction. It will donate directly to complex four as well. So you have this synergistic combination. So you'll feel if you take methylene blue and then go out in the sunlight, you're gonna feel significantly enhanced overall energy focus. Just, you know, you're going to have more, aerobic capacity as well. You know, one thing that's cool about methylene blue that I didn't mention is that it can also act just like oxygen in the mitochondria. So if you have less oxygen around, say you. Visit me here in Colorado where I'm at, you know, 5,000 feet elevation, or if you're on an airplane, for example, when you're 8,000 feet pressurized, you can do my conversions to meters for me. See, I don't, I don't know them off the top of my head. Or if you're doing aerobic work, like if you're doing exercise and you're doing, you want to increase your aerobic capacity, the way you can do this is actually having methylene blue on board. And, and actually, I've been doing this now with with some athletes doing triathlete triathlons, ultra marathons and things and using methylene blue, and they can keep their heart rate up for longer without having to to dial it down as a result of having it on board. So it's, you know, it's it is synthetic. There's no doubt about it. It doesn't come from a natural location, a natural compound. But, again, we don't live in a fully natural world anymore, do we? So For sure. So it, like, enhances oxygen uptake or energy production or combination of those things? So what it does is it actually binds so it binds the it's like the final electron acceptor in your mitochondria is oxygen. That's why we need oxygen. So we have four complexes on the mitochondria. The fourth one, complex four, cytochrome oxidase, Methylene so electrons flow through and then as they go through complex IV, they need to be bound to oxygen so that you can make energy basically. And so if there's enough oxygen around, that system is going to shut down, it's going to slow down. Methylene blue is going to it can compensate for that because it can actually, be that final electron acceptor just like oxygen can be. And so in the presence of low oxygen, it can be maintaining the higher energy energy output. Yes. Exactly. And this has actually been studied in traumatic brain injury and stroke. If you have a stroke, methylene blue, at least in animals that's been studied, it can rescue mitochondria, rescue tissue, prevent tissue from dying really. And the really the mechanism of that is that it because it can help maintain energy production even when there's less oxygen around. And so it's it's it's not been studied in dramatic levels in humans in this way, but because of how compelling the evidence is, like for all of my patients, I have them have a higher strength methylene blue in their medicine cabinet at the ready if they have an acute infection or if they have an acute stress, trauma, you know, God forbid, like, you know, stroke, heart attack, something like that. I have them take two milligrams per kilogram of the methylene blue right away as a as a way to help compensate for the the hypoxic conditions that are, like, that are happening if it's, like, if it's that issue or if it's, obviously, if it's an infection, then we know that these high levels of methylene blue can be very, very helpful. But but usually, I'm giving much lower doses of methylene blue for mitochondrial dysfunction. You know, this, as we talked about, can manifest in a lot of different ways. If from a brain perspective, obviously chronic concentration issues, brain fog, memory, learning, verbal skills. This is all related to mitochondrial dysfunction usually and sort of at its core. When it comes to musculoskeletal, it's often patients that have exercise induced fatigue where they exercise and then they can't move for like three or four days later. This is often because of mitochondrial dysfunction as well. So I've had a ton of success at these lower doses with patients that have chronic inflammatory disorders, autoimmune issues, chronic issues related to things like long COVID and then chronic mold exposure that it's not the infection that's the issue as much anymore, but it's the mitochondria that are just so stressed because of those infections that, like, I it's been amazing. Like, even in people that have had long standing symptoms, once we start methylene blue at these low doses, you can see almost like a dramatic shift very quickly in so many people and it's I think that's why it's become so popular is that so many people out there have mitochondrial dysfunction and so many people out there are suffering and tried so many different things What's so wonderful about methylene blue, these low doses, is that it's, again, it's the cycler. So you have the capacity to make energy and support that, but at the same time, you're not stressing the system by just making energy, but because you also have this capacity to have it as an as, you know, work as an antioxidant at the same time. Interesting. Yeah. So like hypoxia, this low oxygen state, chronically is obviously bad. That's characteristic of a lot of these conditions. What do you think about, like, acute hypoxia? So when you were, like, doing some form of exercise or altitude training or those kind of things. So we've been looking at combining methylene blue with hypoxic training, and it's actually been phenomenal overall. Because what I think happens if you're what I usually recommend doing is doing the hypoxic training first and then taking the methylene blue as a result. So because you really want to have some of that hypoxic stress, right, when you're doing hypoxic training. But methylene boom, we don't think it would mitigate the hypoxic training, but we were just not sure. So what I've been doing mostly is having people do hypoxic training, take their methylene blue, and then immediately do hypoxic training. Right? Because if you take it and you and then you immediately do hypoxic training, you're not gonna really have methylene blue on board quite yet. Right? But then after you do your hypoxic training after about thirty or forty minutes, then methylene blue is going to start taking effect. And that's when we've seen people have an increase in their VO2 max relatively dramatically. And when I'm doing this, I'm working with people that are also really pretty well optimized because we're, you know, doing this, you know, end of one kind of thing as you well know. But 10 or 20% increases in VO2 max, like, not insubstantial using hypoxic training and then doing endurance endurance kinds of work afterwards. That's what I typically would would say is like the what we've kind of nailed down the best is hypoxic training and then aerobic work so that the combination is upgraded significantly when you use methylene blue on the front end of that. Interesting. Yeah. Would, so, like, one of the mechanisms I've also heard people talk about online is that it inhibits nitric oxide. Ah, I'm glad you brought that up. Yeah. Yeah. So that's the vasodilator in in the body. So let's talk about that in in detail because you like the science of all this, and also I'll dig into it a little bit here. So there's different types of or different locations where nitric oxide is produced. Okay. There is the mitochondria where we make nitric oxide. This nitric oxide is typically made when we need to dilate blood vessels that are supplying those cells with with, the substrate that's required to make energy. This is what's called glycolysis. Right? Making you know, glycolysis is the production of making of taking glucose or or ketosis is the same thing or taking ketones and making bringing these to the mitochondria so that you can make energy. Okay? What nitric oxide does in the mitochondria is it is responding to the energy needs of the mitochondria itself to make energy. And so if there's more energy production required, the nitric oxide is going to be produced so that you can make more dilation of blood vessels where, you know, the nitric oxide, you know, lives as well to get more blood flow to that tissue. So methylene blue, we think actually because it increases ATP production increases metabolic rate increases the actual production of nitric oxide inside the mitochondria itself to get more substrate, get more glucose or get more ketones to the area so you continue to make energy. Okay. So that's number one. There is nitric oxide also in the blood vessels that we talked about as well, right? Nitric oxide in the blood vessels is what we think of for heart health and for, you know, for cardiac capacity, etcetera. That's that's the nitric oxide there. And then there's and that's related to the nitric oxide that's in the mitochondria. Okay? But then there is a different type of nitric oxide produced that's in circulation. This is what's called inducible nitric oxide. Inducible nitric oxide is produced when you have trauma, you have inflammation, you have infection. A common group of patients that have too much nitric oxide around are people with pots positional, hypotension and tachycardia syndrome. If you've heard of that before, these patients have a hard time maintaining their blood pressure when they change position and their heart rate is higher at all times because they have a hard time maintaining the, the, the constriction of their blood vessels because they have too much nitric oxide around inside circulation. So what methylene blue can do actually is bind up and prevent the production of what's called inducible nitric oxide. Okay. This is the one this is the type of nitric oxide that is produced when you have trauma, infection, inflammation. And so in these kinds of patients, we've seen amazing benefits of using methylene blue because it can bind up and prevent the production of nitric oxide in the circulation itself. So at very high doses of methylene blue though, at greater than three milligrams per kilogram, for sure you get a depletion not only of the inducible nitric oxide but also the vascular nitric oxide as well that's normally there. Okay? And so, it's actually used clinically for something called sepsis or severe septic shock to give very high give It's like a last ditch effort to to get people's blood pressure to come up is to give them high amounts of IV methylene blue to constrict their blood vessels down and try to keep them alive basically. So, in essence, low doses of methylene blue, especially less than one milligram per kilogram, four, eight, sixteen, twenty five milligrams is not having a detrimental effect on our normal production of nitric oxide in our mitochondria and in our blood vascular system, in our blood vessel lining. It is, however, binding up and preventing the production of inducible nitric oxide, which is more the, the more pathologic type of nitric oxide that happens with inflammation, infection, significant stress, etcetera. It actually blocks the conversion of arginine to nitric oxide is how it does it. So Interesting. So it doesn't have any, negative effects on negative side effects on, like, blood pressure, visualization, and heart function, and circulation? So the other way that methylene blue works is as a what's called a monoamine oxidase inhibitor. So it's an MAOI. So that works in the brain. So you have to be mindful of this. It's gonna increase norepinephrine, dopamine, and serotonin. So you are gonna have more of those neurotransmitters around the higher the dose that you get. So some people will get more They'll get blood vascular constriction a little bit related to the norepinephrine that's being released. So you have to be mindful of that, especially if you have patients or you or whoever is listening, if you have high blood pressure, methylene boot can sometimes increase blood pressure in patients and that are on typically, it's people that already taking a number of blood pressure medications and have a hard time controlling it. But in essence, you have to think about their blood pressure in in that particular group of patients as well. Gotcha. Right. One method so, like, you mentioned the mitochondria function and antioxidant effects. So I guess that also has people excited about the longevity potential longevity effects of of methylene blue. So, are there any, like, research on this, like, animal studies on lifespan or something? Not yet. No. There's the only research that's really done a lot of great work in the last decade or so is a guy named doctor Francisco Gonzalez Lima, and he is at the University of Texas in Austin. And he's been looking at models of Alzheimer's and using methylene blue to support, compensate, and reverse some of the symptomatology, and he's been seeing that benefit actually. And he's been using it in combination with near infrared light as well and seeing a significant benefit there. There was only there's only been one study that was done in normal individuals, and it was only a one time dose of methylene blue. It was getting, I think about a hundred milligrams of methylene blue, which is relatively high dose of methylene blue, one time dose increased visual spatial recognition memory, and they did some functional MRI scans as well, looking at the, you know, these changes in the brain and saw some some significant benefit. That's very interesting to me. With a one time dose, that's reasonable, but I don't think so the challenge is that, like, to give you, like, the another example, they did a they did a study in Alzheimer's patients using methylene blue at three different amounts. I think it was eight milligrams, b I d, seventy five milligrams, b I d, so twice a day, and, like, one hundred and fifty milligrams twice a day. Okay. And the eight milligrams twice a day was the placebo group and or the sham group. And the reason why they did the eight milligrams twice a day was that they wanted to make sure that the people taking the methylene blue all had blue urine basically. And so, but when they looked at the study and looked at the results, the patients that did the best were the patients that had eight milligrams twice a day. Okay. And the reason for this, I think, and I think this is pretty, pretty obvious if you understand the physiology and with clinical practice has been, this has kind of panned out as well. These very high doses, one hundred and fifty milligrams of methylene blue twice a day. It's going to be producing a lot more hydrogen peroxide in the body. This is great for infection, but if your system is not available to produce more glutathione because it's already deficient in the precursor amino acids to make this, right, then you're gonna find it's gonna cause more stress on the system as well. And so this hydrogen peroxide causes stress, and then you can't make glutathione to help compensate for that stress. And so that's why you have a patient with Alzheimer's and you give them one hundred and fifty milligrams twice a day and they're not going to feel good at all actually. This has been my experience is that we're in the in the world of methylene blue that's gotten very popular over the last several years. We're still, I think, on the higher doses, overdosing people rather than under dosing them. And my sense of it is that from a mitochondrial optimization perspective, these lower doses, eight, sixteen, twenty five milligrams, maybe fifty milligrams, it are the doses that are most sustainable. Now, that just to kinda go back to that that study on normal individuals, it was just one dose at a hundred milligrams is gonna make a lot of people feel very, very good actually. But that's not the dose that I think should be taken chronically. And you're talking about longevity. We we don't have, like, longevity studies yet using methylene blue. That's for sure. Just, you know, Alzheimer's population, this normal group that I was mentioning as well. But my my sense here is that because it's a redox cycler, because you're you're compensating for energy production issues, you're compensating for, oxidative stress issues, antioxidant deficiency issues, you can see a significant benefit long term. Now I would just say this in addition, if you're fully optimized, if your mitochondria are perfect, maybe like yours are SIM, maybe you don't need to take methylene blue all the time at all. Maybe you only need to take it on at like on when you're under more stress. So when you're traveling, when you're not sleeping as well, when you, your immune system is taking more of a hit. So in my more optimized patients that I work with, they're not taking methylene blue every day. Excuse me. They're probably taking it maybe a couple of times a week at most and targeting into performance, to, to stress, to travel, whatever it might be and using it that way. Gotcha. Yeah. So it's, it's hard to, yeah, like, quantify the effects of, if it has, like, any dent dent on, longevity or lifespan as of now. So far. So far. But what I the thing is it's hard to do studies in something that nobody can make a billion dollars on, as you know, Sean. Right? So, like, it's it's it's one of those things where I'm using it across the board from of the medical health spectrum, using it in really, really sick people that can't tolerate anything. You You just get them slow amounts of methylene blue. You the key with chronic inflammatory conditions is that you start off with very low doses and you slowly titrate the dose over time. Four milligrams every three days increasing by four milligrams is kind of or three or every three to five days or sometimes seven days until I start seeing a response. And then then when we find the response, what is that response? Is it what we want or is it kind of getting to the place of where we want? And then we can increase it from there. Once you find that optimal dose, then depending on the situation, you may wanna stay on that optimal dose six, seven days a week for two, four, six weeks, maybe longer, depending on the situation. Then you can try to slowly wean it down over time. But the the key for me with methylene blue, if it's not an acute issue, is slow titration, which can be hard depending on the type of form you're taking in the methylene blue. Like, the the liquid is very difficult to dose. It gets everywhere. And then the potency is about 20 or 30% less of what's on label claim on our testing. You know, we use troches, as you know, at transcriptions, which are these dissolvable lozenges that are easy to dose. You can cut them up in squares. You don't have to dissolve in the mouth. You can just swallow it because if you do dissolve the mouth, the mouth is gonna be very blue. That's for sure. Although some people do better dissolving in their mouth, honestly, because it's going to work faster that way. The the cool thing about methylene blue though is that it's almost a 100% bioavailable whether you put it in the in the mouth as a trochee as you if you swallow it, it's just gonna be how fast it gets into the system. But I have a strong feeling that on the longevity side, Sam, that we're going to see much more ongoing, but more probably intermittent dosing, probably not every day dosing for most people is going to be more used, you know, as a, as like a three times a four times a week kind of deal, which is what I typically do, you know, in my own personal practice. Gotcha. Personal, personal care. What I do for myself. So, yeah. But one one thing that there is some evidence is, like, the skin antiaging skin antiaging. So it's very powerful. Antioxidant effects, and some people might do it for, like, skin antiaging effects. Yeah. There's more and more skin products that are using methylene blue in them. And if you talk to people that know a lot about the skin, they'll talk about skin aging being the it's very difficult to get systemic antioxidants to the face and to the skin and so using topical, has been interesting. But we've been people will tell me, again, there's not a lot of studies here, except for there is a study on, sun exposure with methylene blue protecting from damage from sun exposures. This is what you were talking about. It's a very interesting study. But you will actually get reports. I get reports of people that their skin feels better and looks better using methylene blue orally as well. Again, it's so highly bioavailable, which is great. It really does, you know, have a really good diffusion capacity. You know, if you have blood flow getting to areas, methylene blue is gonna get there too, and it's going to hone to areas where there's more mitochondria in general. Mhmm. Okay. Gotcha. So it's like some creams and serums. Can you, like, you know, with a tincture, a pipette with the liquid methylene blue, can you just use it on your face? Or Yeah. I mean, you can, but you're gonna be really blue. Yeah. So, there are there are some of these so there's two different forms of methylene blue. It's called it's methylene blue and something called leucomethylene blue. Leucomethylene blue is just a different form of methylene blue. So methylene blue itself is the oxidized form, and then leucomethylene blue is the reduced form, so it's got more electrons on it. So leucomethylene blue is clear. So a lot of these newer, formulations are using the leucomethylene blue, as for skin creams and things like that. It's unclear to me if that's effect as effective as the oxidized form, the blue form, because the blue form can actually pick up free electrons much easier than the than the colorless form or the leukomethylene blue. So but you're seeing much more of that. I mean, we were the first company, as you know, back in the day, SIM, in 2020 that came out with with methylene blue products at transcriptions. And there's been a lot of interest and there's a lot more products out there, which is good. I think that there's more options. I think the key is making sure you get good quality, right, because quality is a big issue as we were talking about. Understanding the the dosing, just knowing that liquids tend to degrade faster than capsules or trochees, for example. And then, you know, I mean, you also have to think about, of course, and we didn't talk about side effects or things to be concerned about. We should probably go through some of those just for people so that they know. But understanding that making sure Metafli Blue is appropriate for you, and And I can say that most likely the dose that you need to start with is much lower than you think. It'd be a lot of the dosing out there is is kind of is usually around one milligram per kilogram is what's quoted. But what I found is, like, four milligrams, eight sixteen is is almost always better for mitochondrial function. Gotcha. Right. There's there's this, all older guy, I think it was many years ago that that went viral that, his skin was completely blue. But he he was not taking methanol blue, but he was taking the colloidal silver. Yes. So, does, does it have any effects on your skin pigmentation if you take it too much or something like that? No. No. I mean, so if you take very high doses of methylene blue, you will get secretions not only that your of your urine, but other secretions that will turn blue as well. So your tears will turn blue, your poop your poop will turn blue. Yeah. Wow. But this is around this is high doses for long periods of time, like two, three milligrams per kilogram. In general, like low doses of methylene blue are very, very safe. You have to also there's a couple of things that we have to just keep in mind. We talked about talked about initially a little earlier about, hypertension, high blood pressure. So if you have high blood pressure, because of the norepinephrine aspect of Methylene Blue, you might have a blood pressure rise. You have to be careful about that. So in patients that are on multiple blood pressure medications, I do I do have them watch their blood pressure very carefully. The other thing about it being a monoamine oxidase inhibitor is that it increases serotonin and dopamine. So if you're on drugs that increase the amount of serotonin and dopamine around, you have to be careful. There have been some studies showing very high doses of methylene blue over one milligram per kilogram given IV along with SSRIs and these newer generation SNRIs or serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors may cause something called serotonin syndrome, which is very, very dangerous and very rare. It can cause an hemodynamic instability. Your blood pressure goes up, your heart rate goes crazy. But it's never been described with oral methylene blue excuse me, oral methylene blue before at any dose. But so if you are taking an SSRI or SNRI, I do recommend working with a practitioner and going very slowly with your methylene blue dose. Typically, it's not an issue, but it is something to be aware of that there can be an interaction there with with serotonergic drugs. If you're taking dopaminergic drugs like Parkinson's medications, slegiline is another one that people take from the performance side, that may also interact. But again, it's rare to be any issue there, but just be aware of that it could be something, pregnant women, breastfeeding women shouldn't take methylene blue. It's obviously going to give you blue urine as well, so be aware of that. And so, it can stain toilets and things. It also can stain countertops. So, the best way to get methylene blue out of countertops or surfaces is actually with buffered vitamin C. So you can just scrub the vitamin C and it actually it changes the blue to a to the colorless, to the to the leukomethylene blue. So you you have the color. I've saved my marriage, I think, a couple times because I have vitamin C around. And so I can get it out of the sink or get it out of the the washing machine or something where I end up getting it. And so, it's good to have the the vitamin c around as as something. So it will get services blue to be aware of that. The other thing I wanna mention is that there is a hereditary disorder called g six p d deficiency, glucose six phosphate deficiency, and this is when your red blood cells are more sensitive to stress and they can hemolyze. They can break open under stress. And so very high doses of methylene blue have been described as causing a hemolytic crisis or a red blood cell destruction crisis. This is again gonna be over one milligram per kilogram. It's only been described in IV methylene blue as well. But if you're taking high doses of methylene blue for long periods of time, especially you should definitely get a G six PD test. It's very easy to get with your any provider really. But if you're taking low doses, four eight sixteen twenty five, it really shouldn't be an issue. And so I don't regularly have people get tested for G six PD if they're taking methylene blue, unless they're going to be taking very high doses of it, especially for long periods of time. Just like if you're going to take Ivy vitamin C, for example, like you want to get, the G six PD test as well. It's the same potential risk of causing oxidative stress or like a lot of, a lot of oxidative load inflammation, reactive oxygen species, in the system that can cause the red blood cells to be more, more sensitive if you have this particular condition. But you know, all those things being said, Methylene blue has been used as high as twelve milligrams per kilogram in malaria and people do fine for short periods of time, even children. Okay. So that's where the safety profile is extremely, extremely good. And that's I use it almost. I use it so much in my own clinical practice because what I find, Sam, is that so many people have a long way to go with their mitochondrial health. They have a lot of things they need to clean up. They have toxins. They have infections. They have medications that they're taking. They have stress and whatever in their lifestyle, their relationships, all that stuff needs to be cleaned up. But if you can optimize their foundational mitochondrial health by giving some methylene blue, you can really start seeing them have a benefit very, very quickly. And so that's what's so great about it. You can use it low dose, you can use it slowly titrating, and then you can do all the other things that we can do. And as you know, like we our company, we have a nonprofit called Health Optimization Medicine and Practice or Home Hope for short. This is a nonprofit organization training practitioners on how to optimize health. It's a seven module certification and like there's other ways of doing this, but our perspective is to optimize health and focus on creating like the first standard of care for health and not just diseases which all have standards of care. And so, but all this health optimization stuff, as you know, well for most people unlike you, someone, it can take a while, right? If you're starting from a place where you're super sick or you know, you're 40 years old and you feel like crap, you can't pretend like tomorrow you're gonna feel better. That's gonna take a long time, a longer, six months, a year or longer. But methylene blue is one of those amazing compounds that can help people right now while they're on that longer path is what it comes down to. Yeah. Absolutely. So you mentioned the transcriptions, which is, the company you're involved with. Mhmm. And, you you're using the trochees. So, and I've seen, like, a lot of people use it as a nootropic. So, is there any, like, mechanisms there or yeah. Well, so methylene blue as a trochee. So we do so transcriptions was developed as part of the way we can help people right now, actually, on the longer path of optimizing their health. And that's where the nonprofit is kind of the the the birthing of all of this is. And and the trochee is a great delivery device because it's easy to break up into quarters, halfs or fulls. That's a dissolvable lozenge. I actually have them over here. I can show them briefly for your YouTube audience. It looks like this over here. So it's like it's a square and it's got that scoring in the middle, making it easy to cut up into quarters, halves or fulls. Troches were developed, on our side because we knew about these from medical practice. They're they go between your upper cheek and gum. They bypass metabolism in the liver. They're faster acting than if you take a supplement and you swallow it, which is great. The nice thing about methylene blue, as I mentioned earlier though, is that it is a 100% bioavailable just about. So you can swallow it and get the same mitochondrial effects, but it's gonna be faster here. And I do find when my patients that have more cognitive issues, they do better with it dissolved in the mouth even though the mouth is gonna turn pretty blue in the process. That's, the beneficial or not so beneficial side effect depending on how you look at it, right? But from a nootropic perspective, pure methylene blue is going to go where it's needed and there's tons of mitochondria in the brain. That's why people take methylene blue, they feel this elevation, they feel more focused, they feel this sort of subtle energy lift. And then we also have another product called Blue Kenetine which is a combination of Methylene Blue with nicotine, caffeine and CBD and that's our pure focus, you know, get shit done for three to five hours of productivity, cognitive capacity, memory, verbal skill acquisition, you know, etcetera. Like, you can see it all. Like, it's like Adderall without the jitters kind of thing, but it's not, like, don't stop any of your medications, of course, and take, you know, etcetera. But it's, like, got that same kind of feel without the comedown or crash is what it comes down to. So, so we use methylene blue in that formula as a supportive, in the ways that we've been describing, but at the same time as using nicotine and caffeine to kind of clock the energy production cycle so you're revving that up at the same time. But methylene blue and CBD are really supportive there. So, that's how we developed it. And so, methylene blue on its own is not technically nootropic, but it can feel like one, especially if you already have some cognitive issues and like, you're like, holy crap, my brain fog is better. And my attention span is better. So oftentimes we'll give, we'll give a lot. We'll give them the methylene blue first in people, and then maybe some blue can attain down the line, depending on how well their brain is or how much stress their brains under, already. But it's a very low dose of nicotine in the blue Canotene. It's just one milligram. And so, you know, cigarette vaping products, 26, fifty milligrams of nicotine, ridiculous amounts. So just one milligram. And I'm sure you've spoken about this before with nicotine. It's a fantastic cognitive enhancer. It decreases inflammation. It increases some of the good neuro neurotransmitters as well, that can help you feel more focused in cognitive enhancement, etcetera. So as long as you don't vape it or smoke it, of course. Yeah. Yeah. Right. Yeah. I've tried it myself. It kinda feels yeah. Like, it it feels like a nicotine gum, the Yeah. From the nicotine, but, yeah, it has some other effects as well from the methylene blue. Yeah. The the thing about nicotine gum for a lot of people, at least at least in my experience, is that it can hit you so fast that you kinda feel, like, edgy a little bit, like, a little bit is uncomfortable and Yeah. Or a little bit nauseated as well from the from the nicotine. So the the trochee form is is it dissolves between about fifteen to thirty minutes. So you get more of a slower release than the gum actually, and so you you don't get that same kind of jitteriness. And then it also has the CBD and methylene blue in there that are really nice nicely supportive at the same time as having the nicotine and caffeine. So like, if you want to get things done for three to five hours, it targeted focus. It is fantastic. Also, if you have brain inflammation, a little bit of nicotine can go a long way. And we've seen this a lot in the chronic infectious or post infectious population. Now, people are just with a lot of brain fog after an infection, like a little bit nicotine in the blue catenin can go a long way. And we have, I have colleagues that I'm sure, you know, about using nicotine patches as well as as a way to help with this chronic inflammation and seeing a lot of benefit there too. Mhmm. Yeah. Right. We can maybe briefly go through the dosages again as well so that people don't, take the wrong dose. That's a good idea. So lower doses of methylene blue, four, eight, sixteen, twenty five milligrams. These are doses that are for mitochondrial optimization. Is it per milligram or? That's just milligram doses. Okay. That's just milligram. Right. Four milligrams, eight milligrams, twelve and a half milligrams, sixteen milligrams, twenty five milligrams. These are the doses that I found to be most optimal for mitochondrial optimization. I call, I tell my patients energy and resilience, the ability to make energy and the ability to detox from that energy that you've made. So energy production and detoxification, anti inflammation. Okay. The higher doses over about fifty milligrams, but around one milligram per kilogram or higher are good for acute mitochondrial stress. So acute trauma, acute inflammation, and also for acute infection. So a lot of my protocols for acute infection start off at about two milligrams per kilogram. So for you or for me, like about seventy kilogram adult, that's going to be one hundred and forty, one hundred and fifty milligrams of methylene blue that you would take for a couple of days. And then you would slowly come down on that dose over several days after that. So usually I wean it down over about three to five days after initial starting dose of about two milligrams per kilogram in general. So if you're looking to start methylene blue, understand why you're going to be taking it. If you're going to be taking it more for mitochondrial support or for performance or for athletic performance. So endurance training start off at the lower doses, eight milligrams, sixteen milligrams, maybe twelve and a half. Like that's where I really found to be really great starting dose and then titrate your dose every three to five days. If you're taking it every day, or take a higher dose in the next time you're going to go training to see if it has an effect. So what I found for most of my athletes is that for most athletic work, sixteen milligrams is a really good dose if they're doing a lot of endurance work. So I had an ultra marathoner that I work with recently, a 100 mile race here in the US Leadville race it's called. So this is one where you're going up to elevation up to 13,000 feet. So it's very, very high. We did thirty two milligrams of methylene blue, every four hours with blue Canatine every four hours as well. And which is another five milligrams of methylene blue. And he shaved three hours off of his time from the year before. Right. So it's a big, it's a big deal. Right. And I'm seeing this now with hypoxic training, like we talked about as well. And so, but the key is don't overdo it. Don't start with a hundred milligrams usually, unless you're really well optimized or you're just taking it once you should, you probably be okay. But if you already have chronic inflammation, like start off at low doses and titrate it up. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. And what are the different routes of administration? So, like, the liquid form or the pill form or the trochee or Yep. Yes. You so, obviously, the you have IV, which is gonna be your fastest, and that's not gonna be that accessible, but it is more accessible in The US in some locations. Let's keep that aside for now. Either trochee, oral in the sense of a liquid or a, or a capsule or, or a cap a tablet now. So there are some developed, and so in The US, you can get it from a compounding pharmacy. You can get it prescribed, but you can also get it direct to consumer. Like, our company transcriptions is available throughout The United States, and we have actually three products with methylene blue. We have our higher strength methylene blue for practitioners only. It's fifty milligrams, five zero per trochee. And we have our Just Blue which is sixteen milligrams, which is available to everybody. And we have our Blue Canotene which is a combination of the methylene blue with nicotine, caffeine, and CBD. So those are all available online. But, yeah, those are the different dosage forms available. Mhmm. Gotcha. Right. Is there any future, like, where you have a patch or something like that? I I would that's interesting. I hadn't thought about a methylene blue patch. It is very hypo what's the word? It's very observable. So, like, it it would technically technically be there, but I just worry about blue skin. That's my been my consideration with some of the skin creams as well is how long your skin's gonna stay blue and be a Smurf, that way. But my sense with methylene blue SIM is that it's just gonna continue to get more intro more, more interest and more popular. I mean, over the last couple of years, it's just gone it's exploded. Like, before that, nobody knew about methylene blue at all. And, you know, it's been amazing to see the difference. And the reason why, honestly, is because it actually works. It's not subtle in people when you see a significant benefit. Like sometimes it can be subtle, but people that have a longer way to go, like it's not often subtle. Like it's it's like having 300 to lose. And you see a benefit almost right away when you start exercising. It's the same thing with methylene blue. And so, it's I think it's fantastically versatile and, you're just going to see more and more coming from it. But we've done a lot of great blog articles on our website at transcriptions.com where you can go check it out. I've done a lot of media, a lot of interviews and lectures on methylene blue over the years as well. If you're a practitioner and you have a practice where you see patients, whether either it's in person or virtually, we have a practitioner portal with a dashboard with more clinical information and prescribing information as well. And you just go to our website at transcriptions.com and and find that as well. Alright. Sounds good. Well, yeah. I think that's pretty, like, pretty much, like, wraps everything up. Like, very, in-depth information, I think, of that, going through all of all of things about methylene blue. Yeah. Before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and your work? So you can find me on the socials at doctor Scott schurr on on on Instagram specifically, d r s c o t t s h e r r. If you're interested in looking learning more about what I do, you talked about initially, I'm involved in hyperbaric medicine. I have also my own clinical practice and health optimization medicine, which is the nonprofit that started transcriptions. You can go check out more on the nonprofit at homehope.org. You can check out more about my clinical practice at, I think the easiest place is probably just my name, doctor. Scottcher..com. Same as the Instagram handle. If you're just at transcriptions, go check out transcriptions.com or on Instagram at transcriptions as well. Sounds good. Put the links in the show notes. And my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you'd have to sooner? Meditation. For sure. I wish I started meditating at least twenty years before I did because I I realized that you don't wanna believe everything that you think and that you can only get a certain distance in life if you just think that you're gonna get there cognitively or mentally. So once you learn that there's more than just thought and that you are not your thoughts, then everything else gets easier. Yeah. That's a good advice. Well, yeah, it was it was great talking with you and yeah. Let's, stay in touch. Good to see you, Sam. Thanks for having me. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Siim. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.