We all know obesity is bad. It can cut ten to fifteen years off your life. But it's not just about how much body fat you have. It's about where you store it. Your body can store fat in many places under the skin, which is called subcutaneous fat, and around the organs and in between muscles, which is called visceral fat. Visceral fat is the real killer. It drives up your risk of heart disease, diabetes, and early death more than almost anything else. A new UK Biobank study saw that visceral fat, intramuscular fat, and liver fat were the strongest predictors of cardiovascular aging in both men and women. The interesting thing is that this study found that subcutaneous fat, the fat under your skin, was associated with increased aging in only men, but not in women. This is a repeating pattern you see in other studies as well. In this study in Iran, there was a pretty linear relationship between body fat percentage and increased risk of mortality among men. Anything above 15% body fat was associated with a higher risk of mortality. For women, however, there was no correlation at body fat percentages between twenty and thirty five percent. Only severe obesity over 35% body fat and below 20%, which is an indication of being underweight for women, were associated with increased risk. So when it comes to body fat under the skin, the one that you can pinch and grab, then it's not that big of a concern especially for women. As long as the woman isn't severely obese with a body fat percentage over 35%. Now for men however, it's a different story. For men being leaner is protective against heart disease and premature mortality. For men, anything above 15% body fat appears to increase the risk of mortality in a linear fashion. The higher the body fat percentage, the higher the risk is. What it means for men is that they need to keep their body fat on the leaner side. I'm not talking about being single digit body fat, but around 10 to 12% body fat probably is the sweet spot. Here's what 10% body fat generally looks like for men. Of course, it's influenced by muscle mass. If you have more muscle then you look leaner and more jacked. But in this photo, I'm probably around 10% body fat. Maybe 9% at the lowest. Here's a photo of me around 13 to 14% body fat. And here's a photo of me around eight to 9% body fat. However, when it comes to the visceral fat around the organs, then it's harmful for both men and women. It's probably even more harmful for men than it is for women. But both sexes wanna keep their visceral fat on the lower side. Visceral fat, the fat around the organs and inside the muscles increases with age in both men and women. In your twenties, the average visceral fat mass is around 420 grams for males and 230 grams for women. This increases to up to 2,000 grams in men in their eighties and 1,150 grams in women in their eighties. So one of the key reasons why women die to less heart disease and they live significantly longer than men might be that they have less visceral fat despite having more subcutaneous fat. The higher amount of subcutaneous fat in women doesn't increase their risk of mortality. It means that visceral fat, the belly fat is really bad for your risk of heart disease and mortality. So what is the reason why women have significantly less visceral fat than men do? It's estrogen. Women have 10 to 20 times more estrogen than men for the first fifty years of their life and this gives them five decades where they have a slower progression of heart disease. Estrogen also promotes fat storage around the hips as subcutaneous fat instead of visceral fat. How do you know how much visceral fat you have? The most accurate method is to take a full body MRI, but it can be more costly. The second best option is the DEXA scan that's much cheaper, but the DEXA scan can be a little bit less accurate, although not completely wrong. For example, my recent DEXA scan showed my visceral fat was a 150 grams, whereas it was 250 grams on the MRI. I took them two days apart. You can also predict your visceral fat to a certain extent by measuring your waist circumference. That's because visceral fat accumulates around the organs especially around the belly. A 2014 study on over 650,000 people saw that waist circumference was linearly associated with an increased risk of all cause mortality in both men and women. The lowest risk was observed at eighty five centimeters or thirty three point five inches in men and sixty five centimeters or 20 five point five inches in women. A waist circumference of a 100 centimeters or 39 inches in men and seventy five centimeters or 29.5 in women is still acceptable but not optimal. So you wanna get your waist circumference lower because having a lower waist circumference means you have less visceral fat. Alright. Let me recap some of the main points. For women, subcutaneous fat under the skin isn't a big concern as long as you're not over 35% body fat in the severe obesity category. For men, subcutaneous fat over 15% is linearly associated with a higher mortality risk. So it's better to stay leaner as a man around 10 to 12% body fat. For both men and women, a higher amount of visceral fat is a risk factor for heart disease and mortality. Both men and women should get their visceral fat low at least below 450 grams for men and below 300 grams for women. Waist circumference can be a proxy measure of visceral fat, but it's not a 100% reliable. For men, a healthy waist circumference is below 90 centimeters and for women below 75. So how do you go about losing the visceral fat? The obvious answer is to just lose body fat. If you lose subcutaneous fat by cleaning up your diet, losing some weight, and implementing exercise, you will see a reduction in visceral fat as well. Basically, if you're 30% body fat, you'll have less visceral fat if you go down to 20% body fat or 10% body fat. The higher your total body fat percentage, the higher amount of subcutaneous body fat you have, the higher your visceral fat generally tends to be. But you can still be otherwise lean around 10% body fat and still have suboptimal amounts of visceral fat. It's not gonna be thousands of grams, but you can be 10% body fat and still have maybe 500 grams of visceral fat, which is not optimal. I had very low visceral fat. At the lowest, it was 54 grams. There were specific and science based changes I made to my exercise and diet that enabled me to specifically target visceral fat. Check out my video about what I did next.