Omega threes and vitamin d are two of the most popular supplements out there. Almost every doctor recommends them. But this year two clinical trials tested whether supplementing omega threes and vitamin d could slow down biological aging. I'm a big fan of vitamin d and omega threes, but the takeaway isn't as simple as take this to live longer. In this video, I'm breaking down these new studies and discuss whether you should take these supplements to slow down aging on a cellular level. The first study was published in February 2025 and they analyzed the data of 777 participants of the DuHealth CAECL trial. The people took two thousand IU's of vitamin d and or one gram a day of omega threes and or follow a simple at home exercise program for over three years. They used four DNA methylation epigenetic clocks, PhenoAge which estimates biological age based on mortality related biomarkers, GrimAge one and GrimAge two which predict biological age based on DNA methylation markers, and Dunedin PACE that estimates the speed of biological aging. Omega threes alone were seen to lower biological age cut scores, PhenoAge by about 2.9 lower, GrimAge two by about 3.8 months lower, and Dunedin PACE around 1% slower speed of aging. People who had the lowest omega three status in the beginning of the study saw the greatest epigenetic reduction, which highlights the specific effects of raising omega three status. However, the effects on PhenoAge were greater when omega threes were combined with vitamin d and exercise. Omega three plus vitamin d around 3.5 months lower. Omega three plus exercise around 3.6 months lower. Omega three plus vitamin d plus exercise around 3.8 months lower. And vitamin d plus exercise around 3.5 months lower. Vitamin d and exercise alone had no significant individual effects on these clocks. But when vitamin d and exercise were combined, it did result in a three point five month lower pheno age score. These are quite interesting findings. And I think most people would agree that omega threes, vitamin d, and exercise are good for your health. This study looked at the effects of these interventions on your health on an epigenetic level, which further supports their health claims. The problem with these clocks is that as the researchers acknowledged, there's no gold standard or standardized measure of biological age. Each clock will give you different results so you don't know which one is the accurate one. They chose these four specific clocks because they're the most clinically validated ones. But this doesn't mean that they're a 100% accurate. My personal opinion is that you can't take the clocks at face value because based on these results exercise would have no effect on biological aging. Yet exercise has some of the most consistent research out there regarding health benefits. The second study was published in May 2025, and it looked at the effects of two thousand IUs a day of vitamin d and one gram of omega threes for five years. After four years, it was seen that vitamin d supplementation preserved telomere length. Vitamin d slowed telomere shortening by about a 140 base pairs compared to placebo, but omega threes alone had no effect on telomere length. Telomeres are protective caps on top of chromosomes that protect your DNA. Telomere shortening is one of the hallmarks of aging. With age, your telomeres get shorter. However, a lot of scientists agree that telomeres aren't a reliable biomarker of aging. Having longer telomeres doesn't mean that you're going to live longer. Expressing telomerase, the enzyme that grows telomeres, is also implicated in cancer, and it's critical for the development of about eighty five percent of human cancers. However, faster shortening of telomeres is associated with many chronic diseases such as diabetes, Alzheimer's, and heart disease. This doesn't mean that telomere shortening causes these conditions, but it might be a side effect of the disease state. This particular study on vitamin d and omega three supplementation saw that vitamin d slowed down the decline in the shortening of telomeres, which can be interpreted as a beneficial side effect of vitamin d supplementation. But we also need to look at the other studies done on omega threes and vitamin d to make any conclusions about their health effects. Because the idea of biological aging COX is a bit limited. Has vitamin d and omega threes been seen to reduce the risk of chronic diseases and mortality? That's what we want to know. Regarding omega threes then the answer is an astounding yes. 02/2021 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that supplementation of EPA and DHA at a dose of zero point four to six grams a day was associated with a significant reduction in the risk of cardiovascular disease events and myocardial infarction in a dose dependent manner, meaning that higher doses yielded greater results. Every additional gram per day was linked to an additional nine percent reduction in the risk of myocardial infarction. Higher blood omega three levels are also associated with a lower risk of all cause mortality, Alzheimer's, and heart disease. Those with the highest levels of omega threes have up to a 21% lower risk of all cause mortality compared to those with the lowest levels. To know if you're getting enough omega threes, you need to measure your omega three index, which reflects the amount of EPA and DHA in your red blood cells. An optimal omega three index associated with the lowest mortality risk is above eight percent and up to twelve percent, but above six point five percent is already acceptable, although not ideal. An omega three index below four percent puts you in an increased risk category. So based on all the hundreds of clinical trials out there, omega three supplementation and having a higher blood omega three status is beneficial for reducing the risk of mortality, the risk of heart disease, Alzheimer's, and has a beneficial effect on a whole host of biomarkers. With vitamin d, it's a little bit more nuanced. There's no doubt that vitamin d deficiency is associated with a higher risk of all cause mortality, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, dementia, and accelerated aging. But this applies to your blood vitamin d levels. The optimal blood vitamin d level is between thirty to fifty nanograms per milliliter or seventy five to a hundred and twenty five nanomoles per liter. If it's below that, it's a sign of insufficiency. And above that, it's possibly excessive. Using vitamin d supplements can raise your vitamin d status in the blood, and there are also some benefits to supplements. But vitamin d supplements alone don't provide all the benefits of natural sunlight, specifically the UV and infrared radiation. However, it is reasonable to say that it's better to raise your blood vitamin d status artificially than be deficient in vitamin d. The studies about measuring biological aging were done on supplemental vitamin d, which indicates you can get some additional benefits from vitamin d supplementation beyond just raising blood vitamin d levels. Here's a list of things vitamin d supplementation has been shown to do in clinical trials. Lower cholesterol and triglycerides, raise testosterone levels, raise glutathione levels, which is a powerful antioxidant, reduce the incidence of diabetes among those with vitamin d deficiency, decrease insulin resistance slightly. Here's a list of things vitamin d supplements have failed to do in clinical trials, increase bone mineral density, improve depression, reduce blood pressure, improve multiple sclerosis, and cause weight loss. The clinical research about vitamin d supplementation isn't conclusive because there's a lot of difference in the dosing of vitamin d that's used in the studies. And people also have a different baseline status of vitamin d. Vitamin d supplements will probably have a bigger effect on people who are deficient in vitamin d Compared to those who are getting enough sunlight and they have normal vitamin d status. So the main goal would be to get your vitamin d status into the optimal range with or without supplements. That depends on the situation. Alright. Let me give an overview. Omega three supplementation has been shown to lower biological age scores based on several epigenetic age clocks. Most consistently the pheno age clock which is based on 10 blood markers. So it's technically not an epigenetic clock, just a blood marker clock. Combining omega three supplements with vitamin d supplements and exercise provides additional benefits to pheno age reduction. Vitamin d alone doesn't reduce biological age, but it appears to slow down telomere shortening, which omega threes don't. So vitamin d and omega threes appear to complement each other quite nicely. Omega threes have a long history of other health benefits based on hundreds of clinical trials such as a lower incidence of heart disease, diabetes, and Alzheimer's. Vitamin d has less evidence as a supplement, but maintaining optimal blood vitamin d levels should be a high priority for everyone. Keep your omega three index above 8% and your vitamin d levels between thirty to fifty nanograms per milliliter, which is seventy five to a hundred twenty five nanomoles per liter. There are at least 15 supplements out there that have a lot of clinical evidence showing benefits in humans. Check out my video about the top 15 supplements next.