Most people think of melatonin as just a sleep hormone and more recently as a powerful antioxidant. But what if I told you that taking melatonin pre workout could increase your growth hormone by a 157%? That's exactly what a study from 2007 saw. Now I'm not talking about turning into a gigachad because that's not what a growth hormone does. But this surge in growth hormone has benefits on recovery and body composition, which I'm gonna talk about in this video. The study was published in 2007. They took 60 healthy young physically active men and women and randomly divided them into taking either zero point five milligrams or five milligrams of melatonin and compared it to a one milligram placebo pill. They measured their growth hormone at baseline. By minute forty after ingestion, growth hormone rose by a 157 from baseline in the five milligram group and by a 106% in the zero point five milligram group, while the placebo saw no significant effect. Then at the sixty minute mark, the participants all did twenty minutes of leg press resistance training. By that time, growth hormone levels from the melatonin had already began to decrease slightly. About twenty five minutes after the exercise had started, growth hormone levels in the five milligram group had raised again to a 132% and in the zero point five milligram group to a 106% above baseline. Basically, exercise bumped back up the growth hormone because exercise also raises growth hormone. However, in the placebo group, exercise raised growth hormone by only 30% above baseline, which confirms melatonin's effects on raising growth hormone. Typically, you would expect exercise to raise growth hormone by about 50 to 70%, which is less than half than the five milligram group alone. Afterwards, growth hormone levels began trickling down to baseline. This is a very interesting study. It shows that melatonin can raise growth hormone independent of the time of day. The reason for this is because melatonin inhibits somatostatin, which is a growth hormone inhibiting hormone. It's no coincidence that the largest surges in growth hormone happen in the first hours of sleep, especially deep sleep. And it looks like that this surge in growth hormone is more dependent on melatonin rather than sleep itself as this study showed that taking melatonin at any time of the day will raise growth hormone. Now a surge in growth hormone by a 150 or even 300% doesn't mean as much as you think it does. Growth hormones effects on muscle growth are overrated. In fact, growth hormone alone has no effect on muscle growth. Growth hormones effects on muscle mass are mediated through increasing IGF one levels or insulin like growth factor one. Growth hormone from the pituitary gland in the brain signals the liver to produce IGF one that then has anabolic effects on bones, muscles, and other tissues. So did melatonin have any effect on IGF one? Neither of the melatonin doses zero point five and five milligrams nor resistance exercise had a significant effect on serum IGF one levels during the two hour study window. That's because the rise of IGF one from growth hormone takes several hours up to twelve to twenty four hours. So it is biologically plausible that the melatonin intervention did result in higher IGF-one in twelve to twenty four hours, although it wasn't measured in this study. Exercise is known to raise IGF-one, but it takes longer than two hours for the growth hormone to signal IGF-one production, which is why exercise wasn't seen to raise IGF-one in this study either. So what does it mean? Does it mean that you should start popping melatonin before your workouts? Unfortunately, we don't have a lot of other studies looking at the effects of pre workout melatonin on exercise performance. In a few studies, taking melatonin thirty minutes before high intensity training reduces markers of oxidative stress and lipid peroxidation, which is the oxidation of fats and enhances immune function. Melatonin at a dose of six milligrams taken thirty minutes before aerobic exercise also increases carbohydrate metabolism, which means their glucose uptake into the cells was higher. In rats, melatonin thirty minutes before exhaustive exercise has been seen to improve endurance and accelerate muscle glycogen replenishment within the next forty eight hours. Now those effects aren't massive but they are statistically significant and we don't know what kind of an effect would the 157% increase in growth hormone have on body composition or muscle growth. I think the effects would be greater than zero but probably not massive. I guess someone just has to try it out and by that someone I mean me and by me I mean yes I did try it out for a few workouts. So I took five milligrams of melatonin one hour before resistance training and I did feel slightly nauseous and a little bit tired especially after the workout. Feeling slightly more tired didn't reduce my performance. I was still as strong as was before but I did feel a bit more tired during the workout and I felt especially tired after the workout. Now you can try it out for yourself, maybe you don't get that effect because melatonin is incredibly safe, but I don't see myself using pre workout melatonin on a regular basis maybe occasionally, but this a 157% increase in growth hormone isn't that much. It's worth noting that you shouldn't get caught up with the growth hormone as a lot of people do. Fasting is notoriously known to raise growth hormone, if you fast for twenty four hours, growth hormone has been seen to rise by 210% on average and do so 70% more frequently compared to eating regularly. But if you're not eating then you're not going to be able to build muscle and be anabolic, you need to eat to build muscle. Fasting can just signal your body to preserve the lean tissue that's what growth hormone does, growth hormone increases during fasting so that your body would reduce muscle protein breakdown and increase fat oxidation and fat breakdown. So the growth hormone is a signal for your body to lose fat and maintain muscle, that's why exercise increases growth hormone, that's why sleep increases growth hormone, that's why fasting increases growth hormone as well. Your body wants to preserve the muscle and lose the fat. This is the biggest benefit of growth hormone and indirectly it would also have positive body composition effects and muscle hypertrophy effects. But fasting itself isn't going to build muscle even if you increase growth hormone. To build muscle you need to do resistance training such as weight lifting, calisthenics or even sprinting. Sprinting also increases growth hormone, in fact, a single session of 250 meter sprint intervals repeated for four rounds at 80% of max speed has been seen to increase growth hormone by 1600%. Again, it's going to signal the body to maintain the muscle and burn the fat. However, it's been seen that your body adapts to the same signal and it produces less growth hormone. In this 2004 study, they saw that thirty second all out sprints did result in 1,000 to 1400% increase in growth hormone. But after six weeks of doing those same workouts, the body increased growth hormone by only 500 to 800% despite their sprint performance increasing. Now that's still a significant increase in growth hormone but it's 50% smaller than doing the first workout. What it means is that your body responds best to growth hormone if the stimulus is novel and something you haven't done before. Rather than doing the same thing all over again, you need to switch things up. There are also some interesting sauna studies from the eighties showing how saunas can massively increase growth hormone. Two twenty minute sauna sessions at 80 degrees Celsius separated by a thirty minute cooling period can raise growth hormone twofold over baseline. That's a 100% increase. Two fifteen minute solar sessions at a 100 degrees Celsius separated by thirty minute cooling increases growth hormone fivefold. That's a 400% increase. Two one hour solar sessions per day at 80 degrees Celsius for seven days was shown to boost growth hormone by 16 fold on the third day. That's a 1500% increase. Now those solar sessions are quite long. I don't think anyone has time to do two one hour solar sessions per day especially given the fact that the four times 250 meter sprint increased growth hormone by the same amount as the two one hour sauna sessions and the sprinting workout will take you less than thirty minutes. Saunas however are still amazing for reducing muscle breakdown and improving recovery from exercise and a lot of those effects are because of increased growth hormone. There are a lot of studies showing that saunas help with muscle preservation so you can definitely gain extra growth hormone by having saunas after your workouts plus they help with muscle recovery and hypertrophy. Now if you were to create some sort of an optimal protocol based on this video then it would be something like this. You fast for at least sixteen hours to deplete your liver glycogen which would then increase growth hormone production. You can even go for a thirty minute walk in the morning to accelerate this process. Two, you ingest five milligrams of melatonin one hour before exercise and wait. Three, you do the four times 250 meter sprint interval workout at 80% of your max speed. Rest three minutes between each 250 meter sprint. Four, you go to the sauna for at least twenty to thirty minutes at 80 degrees Celsius. You can do two rounds for optimal effects. And lastly, five after about one to two hours, you break the fast and have a high protein and high carbohydrate meal to support muscle anabolism. And by the end of it, you're gonna look like android the giant because growth hormone increases the size of your hands and feet. I'm joking but, you know, that's how you would do this kind of a protocol. Is this melatonin protocol going to lead to some massive muscle growth? Probably not, but the effects would be greater than zero in my opinion. It's definitely not essential because just sprinting alone increases growth hormone and it does so more than the melatonin supplementation. And it might not be the best idea to take melatonin in the middle of the day to disrupt your circadian rhythm. So overall I think that this study is very interesting and it highlights the important role of melatonin beyond just sleep. It shows that melatonin increases growth hormone independent of the time of day, and and if you were to really micromanage and try to min max your growth hormone protocol then melatonin supplementation could be a part of it. You could also just take melatonin before bed to see an additional increase in growth hormone, that's one option, but this hasn't been studied. If you want to know the most important factors for muscle growth based on science, then check out this video I made with Meno Henselmans next.