Did scientists in China just make old monkeys young again? At least that's what a lot of social media headlines and articles claimed. In this video, I'm going to walk you through what this study actually found. And I'll also have Matt Caiber Lane share his thoughts who's one of the world's leading bio gerontologists. The study was published in September 2025 in the journal Cell. They took aged Macaca vasicularis also known as crab eating macaque who were 19 to 23 years old. For humans that would be the equivalent of 57 to 69 years. There were also younger monkeys who were used for comparison as the control group. The macaque was chosen because they're quite similar to humans in physiology, genetics and disease susceptibility. We share 93% of our DNA with them. The monkeys were injected with senescence xenoresistant human mesenchymal progenitor cells, SRCs, derived from human embryonic stem cells. They gene edited the stem cells specifically the FOXO three gene to introduce double mutations that resulted in higher FOXO three expression. FOXO three is a gene that seemed to have longevity effects in animals and in humans. The longest living humans have higher FOXO three a expression. FOXO three a is a gene that regulates stress resistance and resilience, basically making the organism more resilient against stress, exercise, and energy deprivation. So we know that stem cell function is important for biological aging. Stem cell dysregulation is one of the hallmarks of aging. And we know that loss of stem cell function in different tissues and organs during aging can contribute to declines in the function of those organs as well as declines in our ability to heal from wounds. It's a little bit less clear how big the effects will be for lifespan and health span by restoring or even boosting stem cell function. There really haven't been any compelling studies in mice showing that you can robustly increase lifespan through stem cell therapies. Probably also worth saying there's no evidence in humans that stem cell therapies promote longevity despite the fact that there are lots of clinics out there, giving these sorts of therapies. There have been a couple of studies in rodents using exosomes from young animals that have reported increases in lifespan or improvements in health span. It seems plausible that those exosomes are stem cell derived, although that hasn't really been definitively shown. So I think what we can say at this point with confidence is stem cells are part of the aging process, or I should say, I think what we can say with confidence is that stem cell dysregulation is part of the aging process, but we really don't know at this point how large the effect would be if we could prevent stem cell dysregulation or even boost it beyond normal levels in aged animals or aged people. The other old monkeys got either saline water or they were injected with human stem cells that weren't genetically edited with FOXO three. The monkeys received their treatment every two weeks into the arm vein for a total of forty four weeks or eleven months which for humans would be the equivalent of three years. The dose was two million cells per kilogram of body weight which is similar to the doses in human clinical trials. The scientists did comprehensive before and after testing on the old monkeys. They did routine blood tests, cognitive tests, morphometric analysis and medical imaging. In total, they analyzed 61 tissues across 10 systems and also measured epigenetic age scores. What they found after forty four weeks was that their biological clock scores decreased by about two to seven years which in humans would be the equivalent of six to fifteen years. Their brain function improved. They saw about 30 to 40% improvement in accuracy and latency. Their cortical thickness in the brain was three to five years younger after the treatment. Their myelin density that protects neurons was 25 to 30% higher. And they saw a reduction in amyloid and tau which are implicated in neurodegeneration. Their bone mass increased by about ten to twenty percent. Their reproductive health improved by about twenty to forty percent. They saw about 35% reduction in skin senescence and thirty to fifty percent reduction in peripheral blood mononuclear cell senescence. Out of the all organs analyzed, fifty four percent of them improved. And overall, the treatment was safe and well tolerated. While these results sound quite impressive, they have to be taken with a grain of salt. I think people should appreciate that this paper did not actually show a reduction in biological age despite what they claimed. This is a little bit of a larger problem in the field is that many people are just making up their own definition of biological aging and then claiming a reduction in this case. Unfortunately, the editors allowed that into the paper. What they did do was create their own epigenetic and transcriptional clocks that correlate with age. And what they showed was that the FOXO three engineered stem cells could have an impact on those custom made clocks in the direction that would be consistent with lower biological age. There are a couple of reasons to be a little bit skeptical of the clocks used here. They were built off of very, very small sample sizes, so I think they only had about eight animals per group. Typically, when you're building biological age estimators, you would use orders of magnitude more individuals to create your clocks. So in some ways, this is a very preliminary result. It's consistent with the idea that the engineered stem cells were causing the epigenome and the transcriptome to shift back towards something that looks more like a youthful state, but it certainly is not definitive for a reduction in biological age or a reversal of biological aging. Unfortunately, the authors of the study didn't provide any external images or before and after photos of the monkeys. So we don't know if they actually looked younger. I'm pretty sure that they actually didn't look younger, their epigenetic age scores were lower but that doesn't mean that they actually became younger. What's more scientists have already reversed epigenetic age several times in the past. In 2017, good old calorie restriction of 30% in rhesus monkeys resulted in seven years younger blood methylation age. That's the equivalent amount of reduction to this study. In humans, there's also research that a regular over the counter supplement called calcium alpha ketoglutarate has resulted in eight years lower biological age scores. Nobody really thinks that calcium a k g literally makes you eight years younger because if it were to be true then this would be the biggest news in the world. But I'm pretty sure most people have never even heard about it. It's just that the epigenetic age correlates to an epigenetic signature that correlates to people who are usually younger. It's a copy of a copy of a copy. Will these monkeys live longer as a result of this? I think that's a really interesting question. Obviously, one that is impossible to answer with confidence at this point. My speculation is that if they do live longer, it will be a relatively small effect. Less than 10% effect on lifespan would be my guess. I hope I'm wrong. I do think it's quite possible that we could see improvements in function and in health span metrics, that are much more extensive than than what we're showing here. I think one of the real limitations of this study is that for reasons that I don't understand, they chose not to do the easy mouse experiment, which would have been to treat mice with the engineered stem cells or with exosomes derived from those stem cells for a little bit longer period of time than what they did and actually ask the question, can you robustly increase lifespan and health span with this treatment in mice where you can do that experiment in a relatively short period of time? Unfortunately, they didn't do that, so hopefully they will in the future. The other thing I think that needs to happen is a much more extensive characterization of the functional changes that go along with this treatment in nonhuman primates. Again, hopefully, that will be done with larger sample sizes so we can have more confidence in the robustness of the results. Another sign that these monkeys didn't literally become young is that only fifty four percent of the organs that were analyzed saw improvements in function. Whereas in the monkeys who got non gene edited stem cells, the improvement rate was thirty one percent. The paper did not in fact show improvements in organ function for 54% of the organs. The only place in my view where there was really convincing evidence for functional improvements was in the brain. It did seem as though the monkeys that received the engineered stem cells had improvements in cognitive function. This was backed up by some morphological changes by brain imaging. So that's important. And I again, I think that's pretty compelling. They also showed some evidence for improvements in bone in the oral cavity. Outside of that, there weren't any functional assessments of organ, function. What was really shown were more molecular markers that would be consistent with improved organ function at the cellular level. And then, of course, the epigenetic and transcriptomic clocks that we discussed earlier. So, again, I think it's it's actually quite compelling to see the changes that we saw in the brain and potentially in the oral cavity. But to really state that this is having systemic rejuvenating effects or broadly improving organ and tissue function, is an overstatement of of what was actually shown in the paper. And for that reason, I think it is fair to say that, this is not true reversal of aging. Again, in my opinion, if we had something that truly reversed aging, what you would see is a reversal of all or at least the vast majority of things that change in a predictable way with age. So at best, this is only changing half the transcriptional changes that that happen with age, which is not what we would expect if this was a true true reversal of the aging process. It's something else. Still important, still could have large impacts on health, not a reversal of aging. I'm not saying that this isn't a significant finding or an interesting study. It certainly is. It's the first time this type of technology has been used, and it's definitely gonna get better in the future. But the problem is many people misinterpret the results, they didn't read the paper actually, and they overhyped the results saying that the longevity escape velocity is near, we're gonna solve aging, look at this study. Well, if you look at the study then it's not that impressive. So I'm pretty bullish on the future of stem cells, exosomes, and gene therapy for promoting health span in people. I think those all of those technologies have a lot of potential to be used therapeutically in humans. I don't know if they're gonna have large effects on lifespan, but certainly for a variety of health span metrics, I think there's reason to be optimistic. It's also worth appreciating just how preliminary this particular study is. Again, the sample sizes were quite small, about eight animals per group. It was in nonhuman primates, which is which is really important. It's a step much closer to humans than mouse studies. So I think that's really why it was published in Cell. But the sample sizes are quite small, and the characterization was pretty limited. So I think we're still pretty far away from seeing use of this technology at least through the typical regulatory approval pathway in humans. Now it is likely that in the next few decades, scientists will discover many technologies and ways to extend human lifespan. We'll have technology and medical breakthroughs that literally make you younger, both appearance wise and physical health wise. But we don't know if it's gonna happen or when it's going to happen. What you need to do is just adopt a lifestyle that minimizes your risk of dying to things so you can live long enough until those medical breakthroughs arrive. Check out my video about giving yourself the highest likelihood of living to 150 and beyond next.