Why is everyone supplementing lithium nowadays? No. I'm not talking about leaking batteries. I'm talking about lithium, the mineral that you naturally get from drinking water and some foods. You can find lithium in the popular supplement mix Novos, and Brian Johnson's supplement stack also contains lithium orotate. Is lithium safe in the first place, and why are so many people taking it? In this video, I'm going to go through the research on lithium supplementation. Lithium isn't considered an essential mineral, but in the category of possibly essential minerals such as boron. It appears to have neuroprotective effects and neurotrophic effects, meaning it can support brain function. In mice, lithium increases neurogenesis, which is the growth of new brain cells. Historically, lithium has been used to to treat bipolar disorder and mania. It's actually the current gold standard for these conditions. That's because lithium has mood stabilizing effects and can reduce manic episodes as well as depressive symptoms. However, low dose lithium could also fight against dementia and neurodegeneration. A 2022 retrospective course study on elderly people in western populations found that those prescribed lithium experienced a forty four percent decreased risk of developing dementia compared to those who didn't take it. None of the participants had dementia at baseline, and they were all over the age of 50. Up to seventy five percent of those who were prescribed lithium had bipolar disorder. That's quite interesting. The people who were given lithium mostly because of their bipolar disorder had lower rates of dementia. Because this is an observational study, we can't jump to any conclusions about the effects of lithium. But it is quite compelling because people who have bipolar disorder already have a higher risk of mortality and they're less likely to follow healthier behaviors. Getting diagnosed with bipolar disorder is usually associated with a higher risk of dementia and people with bipolar disorder haven't seen to follow unhealthier lifestyles. So despite those people who had bipolar disorder following unhealthier lifestyles and having a higher risk of dementia at baseline already because of their condition, they still saw a decreased risk of dementia when taking lithium. In addition to its neuroprotective effects, lithium also has anti Alzheimer's properties by inhibiting an enzyme called glycogen synthase kinase, g s k three, which creates the tangles in the brain that leads to neurodegeneration. So are there any actual clinical trials looking at the effects of lithium on cognition? A 2015 meta analysis of randomized placebo controlled trials found that lithium treatment could reduce cognitive decline and be beneficial in people with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's dementia. They pulled data from three clinical trials, including over 230 participants. Older adults with amnestic mild cognitive impairment who had been treated with lithium have been seen to have better long term cognitive outcomes compared to controls even eleven to fifteen years after the fact. So it does appear that lithium has protected effects on the brain and it might reduce the risk of dementia. People with already existing mild cognitive impairment reduce the risk of dementia. People with already existing mild cognitive impairment can also see some benefits from lithium, but the effects of lithium don't end with neurodegeneration. Remember that lithium helps with bipolar disorder and depressive symptoms. Well, higher amounts of naturally occurring lithium in drinking water haven't seen to be associated with longevity and lower suicide rates across the entire globe. In Lithuania, Texas USA, Japan, Denmark and other European countries. In a 1990 study in Texas, they found that the incidence of suicides, homicide, rape, and other crimes were significantly higher in counties where the drinking water had little to no lithium, even after controlling for population density. A 2009 study in Japan found the same thing. Areas with low amounts of lithium in the drinking water had higher rates of crime. There was an inverse association between lithium levels and crime rates. And you can find similar studies across all continents which is very interesting. Again, these studies are observational and there are a lot of other factors that could explain these results. Maybe the areas that have less lithium are also poorer which is why you have higher crime there or that richer people are more likely to drink bottled water. But given what we know about lithium's effects on stabilizing mood, reducing manic episodes, protecting the brain and improving mental health, it wouldn't be out of the realm of possibility that lithium has benefits on improving those kinds of behavioral conditions. Looking at all these studies, I'm definitely more interested in making sure that I do get enough lithium. How much lithium are you getting from your tap water and how much are you drinking is a very tricky question. You'd have to look at the mineral content of your local tap water and then calculate how many liters are drinking etcetera. That can be quite tedious. But if you are going that route then know that the recommended intake of lithium is around one milligram per day. There's no RDA for lithium but one milligram a day is considered to be a good dose. Just be careful because excess amounts of lithium can still be toxic. You can get cardiovascular complications as well as too low blood pressure if you consume too much lithium. You also don't wanna take lithium during pregnancy because it's been seen to increase the risk of cardiac malformations. Microdosing lithium three hundred micrograms a day for fifteen months has been seen to stabilize cognitive impairment in Alzheimer's patients. When it comes to supplementation, then the typical dose used for cognitive impairment is a hundred and fifty to six hundred milligrams a day, which is quite a large dose. However, it's quite small compared to the doses of six hundred to eighteen hundred milligrams a day used to treat mania and bipolar disorder. The biohackers microdose lithium at a dose of around one milligram a day. And in my opinion, the best form is lithium orotate. The second best might might be aspartate. What about my personal experience? I have taken one milligram lithium in the past, maybe like five years ago. I did try a short experiment. I wasn't doing it for, like, mental health benefits or something, but I did notice, like, my mood was slightly upbeat or slightly happier generally, which couldn't have been like placebo because, I wasn't even aware that lithium had like mood enhancing or mood stabilizing benefits. So it couldn't have been placebo because I wasn't even aware that this could be one of the benefits that I could get. I didn't notice any improvements in my cognition either but the slight maybe like five to 10% improvement in mood was the only thing that I did notice. Lithium isn't on my list of essential supplements but if I was suffering from mood disorders or chronically low mood then I might try it out. There are 15 supplements that have been seen to have a lot more clinical benefits in humans which I cover in this video. Check it out for supplements that a lot more people should take. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is Syme. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.