You know, people were so scared of estrogen. They weren't replacing it, but we know from multiple studies that if you give women estrogen early in menopause, so before ten years, then there is a forty percent reduced risk of cardiovascular disease. And heart disease is the number one killer of men and women, and we can reduce your risk by forty percent. And we know from studies that the testosterone serum level does not mean that you feel a certain way. Like, you could have a high testosterone serum level and you could still feel bad. Amy, welcome back to the show. Thank you. It's so good to see you again. Yeah. And it's been a while. And, I'm very always interested in, like, some of the different kind of longevity therapeutics and, like, interventions that you're doing at your clinic and your work. But, for this episode, I was thinking of focusing mostly on, the hormone side. So HRT, hormone replacement therapy for women and the TRT as well. So testosterone replacement therapy. There's a lot of, like, you know, misconceptions about TRT and HRT thinking that it's, you know, harmful for your health. But I guess, yeah, we can cover all those topics and, refute some of the misconceptions. Yes. I would love that. Yeah. So, you know, what is what do you think then, is replacing hormones as you get holder with, these are their therapies? Is it, like, you know, net positive? Or, what's what does, like, evidence say from, the studies? Yes. I mean, I think I I think that outside of a healthy lifestyle, replacing these hormones in men and women are the best things that you can do for your health if you want to live longer and live better. We have a lot of other things in the longevity space that are being looked at, but we have so much data behind testosterone, estrogen, progesterone therapy. And there's a lot of misconceptions and myths out there, but these hormones overall are are very net positive. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. Like, I often hear that, you know, obviously, that there's the connotation that steroids, the bodybuilders use in larger quantities, a much larger quantities than TRT, then, they obviously have negative effects on your health and, shorten your lifespan. A lot of bodybuilders die young because of abusing those drugs. So maybe people have, like, a, you know, negative association because of, that reason. Yeah. I think that's part of it. Certainly, in men, you know, the high dose testosterone as well as all the other, non testosterone androgen, you know, steroids that that are out there. The synthetic steroids, those can be damaging. They can really affect your lipids especially. They can affect your liver. You know, they can do all kinds of things. And oftentimes, people are using them without, a doctor's, you know, oversight, and so that's always a problem too of of just kind of messing with your body and not not checking things along the way. Mhmm. So I think that's the problem you know, that's one of the problems in with men. And then in women, you know, we have still the sort of misunderstanding of the women's health initiative, which was a 2002 study that, you know, kind of came out and scared women about hormone therapy, and we still have not gotten over that that that study. Mhmm. What was it like? What did they find in the study, and why were people so scared? So initially, this is a study this is a a randomized controlled trial where they gave there was three arms. They gave one arm the estrogen, which is synthetic estrogen. They gave one arm estrogen and progesterone, and then the other arm was a placebo. And they were they're gonna be at eight year study. They stopped the study just after five years because they were concerned about increased risk of breast cancer, heart attack, strokes, dementia, and blood clots. And so, you know, there are all these headlines that went out that said, you know, these hormones are causing all these horrible things, and eighty eight percent of women who were taking hormones at that time got off of them because of the study. But there were in the last twenty years, we've gone back and we've analyzed that study, you know, in detail. And what we've learned is several things. First of all, the estrogen did not cause breast cancer. And in fact, the women who took the estrogen by itself without the progestin, the synthetic progestin, which is not a great not a great drug, The estrogen only arm had a twenty nine percent reduced risk of of actually getting breast cancer. And the women who started hormones early in menopause within the first ten years had reduced heart disease, and they had reduced like, all of these things, were not actually true if you adjusted the, you know, the study to be the right patients in the right age group and the right drugs. Gotcha. Yeah. And I I I would imagine that since then we've had, you know, many other other studies as well looking at those effects and not finding increased risk. Yeah. We have. I mean, we have now a meta analysis on breast cancer that's 10 randomized controlled trials and that have basically, when pulled together, over 12,000 women, and they found that there's about a twenty three percent reduced risk of breast cancer when you take estrogen therapy by itself without that synthetic progestin. And we also know that progesterone, which you do have to give to women if you still have a uterus because it protects the uterus from estrogen, we know that the natural progesterone does not increase breast cancer risk. So, you know, there's all this fear. I think breast cancer is the thing that most women are scared of. When they hear hormones, the first thing they think is, I'm gonna get breast cancer. But we actually have all of this very good evidence that estrogen therapy does not increase your your risk of breast cancer. But, you know, it's hard to change women's fear. Right. What what are, like, the benefits potential benefits that you would expect from it? So, like, obviously, after menopause, estrogen levels decrease quite quite a lot. So, I guess it's, like, quality of life and energy levels and those things are the one of the biggest reasons. That's a big reason. Certainly, there's there's two parts of this story. So estrogen I think of estrogen as like this shield that is protecting, you know, almost all the organs in your body. So from your brain to your blood vessels, your pelvic floor, your muscles, your bones, and it's there. It's silent. You don't know you have it, but it's there protecting you. And after menopause, which is, you know, you lose your estrogen and progesterone, your ovaries stop working, you run out of eggs. After menopause, you lose that protective shield. And so all of a sudden, after those hormones drop, you see this huge increased risk of, you know, diabetes and increased visceral fat and increased heart disease and increased bone loss and osteoporosis, dementia. Like, everything goes up significantly after menopause if you don't replace estrogen. And, you know, people were so scared of estrogen, they weren't replacing it. But we know from multiple studies, including both observational studies and randomized controlled studies, that if you give women, estrogen early in menopause, so before ten years, then there is a forty percent reduced risk of cardiovascular disease. And heart disease is the number one killer of men and women, and we can reduce your risk by forty percent just by giving you estrogen early. Reduced risk of osteoporosis. Osteoporosis, one in every two women will suffer from an osteoporotic fracture. And some of these fractures, like hip fractures, have a twenty five percent one year mortality rate. So that means that twenty five percent of women who have a hip fracture will die in the first year. And we can prevent that with estrogen. So there's all the it's dementia, it's heart disease, it's osteoporosis, it's pelvic floor health. There's all these things that we can prevent. And these hormones can make you feel better, prevent your you know, help with your hot flashes, your mood, your libido, all of that as well. Mhmm. Wow. That's super interesting that even before the menopause, you can like so so that's the estrogen then, like, gradually keep decreasing already before the menopause, which would explain why giving estrogen before the menopause would reduce the risk even more. So it starts it starts about about five to ten years before so menopause is defined as twelve months without a period. So after after you've gone twelve months without a period, then you are officially in menopause. But the your estrogen and progesterone have started dropping five to ten years before that. So that that's perimenopause is that that time before. So certainly, we often give progesterone in perimenopause because it helps with symptoms. But some women off also need estrogen because their estrogen has gotten so low during that time. And but certainly, once you stop having periods, then you should start thinking about whether you want to to add in estrogen and progesterone as early as you can. Estrogen, yeah, like, might I often find on online that some people are super against estrogen for different reasons, but the estrogen has, like, all these cardio protective effects and neuro protective effects. And, you know, one of the theories is that estrogen or, like, the higher estrogen level that women have until menopause is one of the reasons why they also have lower rates of heart disease initially and they live, you know Yeah. Live five, ten years longer than men on average. Ex yeah. Exactly. And it is and the estrogen is protected. It's very cardio protective. So it's it's preventing plaque formation in your blood vessels, which is why, like you said, women develop heart disease about ten years later than men. But the problem is that it oftentimes goes undetected because our symptoms of heart disease are, you know, very vague and hard to find. And even though women end up living about five years longer than men, we spend 25% more time in poor health. And I think that a lot of that is because we lose these vital hormones at about age 50. And what's interesting is that humans are one of the only species of animals, one of the only mammals that just stop making vital hormones, like, halfway through their life. No. Like, other there's some orcas or some whales that do it, but for the most part, other animals don't do this. And I think it's like a kind of a thing that it goes back to, you know, in the old days, women didn't live all that, you know, like the caveman days. Like, they weren't living to be 90 years old, so it was fine if they stopped making hormones at 50. But now at 50, like, we're just getting started. We still have forty or fifty years ahead of us. And so, you know, I think we have to start kind of reframing how we think about midlife and menopause and, you know, it's not the end of of of your life or your health. Like, if we take charge of it, you can actually really increase and improve your health. So in both sexes, both men and women, testosterone production, you know, it starts to go down slowly starting at about age 25. So at 25, you get this kinda slow gradual, you know, reduction in testosterone that continues throughout your whole life. And so in minutes, it's gradual. Women's gradual. But the estrogen and progesterone production, it's like falling off a cliff. Like, you just and and, unfortunately, I think one of the misconceptions that's out there, especially in the wellness space, I think that that women think that they can kind of lifestyle their way out of of of this, you know, of having problems from these hormones. Like, they think they can do, you know, if I exercised, you know, enough and I eat properly and I do tai chi and I do coffee enemas, whatever, then then I can keep my hormones, you know, quote, unquote, imbalance, and it'll be fine. But the problem is that you you literally run out of eggs, and it's the cells around the eggs, the follicular cells that make your estrogen and progesterone. So when you run out of eggs, which happens, you know, again, about age 50, then you are not able to make those hormones. It doesn't matter, you know, how perfect your lifestyle is. You cannot make those hormones. So I think that's a piece of education that it needs to happen in the wellness space. Like, yes, lifestyle is so important for everything, but it will not give you back those hormones. Yeah. Yeah. You can't, like, undo, I mean, oppose, like, eventually, this is gonna happen even with the healthy lifespan. Yep. You can't and I, you know, I've even seen I've seen, some sort of people in the wellness space talk about, like, well, you know, if the if if these women were, like, living their lives properly and eating as as they should, then this wouldn't happen. And their hormones, then they wouldn't be out of balance. Yeah. And that's just that's preposterous. Yeah. Yeah. They need to follow the special diet that they prepare for. If there was a special diet, I I guarantee we'd all be on it. Yeah. But, what about men then before we go to testosterone? So, like, then the estrogen would have also cardioprotective effects for men, and men obviously have some estrogen levels. So Right. Should like or would like increasing estrogen levels in men have any benefits? Obviously, there's the connotation that excess estrogen gives you, like, man boobs and those kind of things. So, what's the difference? And and actually, it is true. Estrogen absolutely has counterproductive effects in men. And a lot of the benefits that we see with testosterone are because of estrogen. Like you said, testosterone, you know, part of it gets aromatized into or turned into estrogen in the body in both men and women. And so a lot of the the bone protection benefits of testosterone in men is due to estrogen. Many of the brain benefits and many of the cardiovascular benefits, the lipid benefits, a lot of that is because of estrogen. You know, certainly, you if men have too much estrogen, they can become symptomatic. They can start crying in, you know, TV commercials, and you can develop the gynecomastia and things like that. But, you know, most of the time, that is not a problem. And in fact, when we give testosterone to men, like, when they with for as testosterone therapy, it used to be that a lot of people would give an estrogen blocker, at the same time to prevent testosterone being made into estrogen because they were so scared of estrogen. But we know now that you you don't really wanna give those estrogen blockers unless you really have to because the estrogen is so important for I mean, it's important for erections. It's important for bone health. Like, all the things, not just testosterone that you want. You actually want both. Right. Yeah. Have you also heard the heard of this seventeen alpha estradiol, which, is considered like this nonfeminizing estrogen apparently, and indeed extend lifespan in male mice by Yes. By a certain percentage, but not in female mice. So there might be like, you know, females have plenty of estrogen, but the males don't have enough and maybe giving them non feminizing estrogen has, like, benefits. Yeah. Yeah. I think it's really fascinating. I would love to see some human studies on it. You know, there was a I think it was a study out of The UK that looked at it was just it was a correlation study, but they looked at all the medications that were associated. I'm sure you saw it were associated with, you know, longer lifespan versus, like, lesser lifespan. And of the, like, top 15 or 20 medications that were associated with a longer lifespan, like, seven or eight of them were estrogens, in women. And so I do think that they're that the seventeen alpha estradiol is is fascinating, and I would love to see it studied in men. Yeah. A lot of people have started to take it. Like, I've seen on online different kind of people's taking it. But, yeah, who knows? Would it, like, raise their blood estrogen levels then? Can you measure it, like, if it's working or? I you know, I don't know. I I mean, there's I believe there's test for it. I don't know if the normal, like, LabCorp and the, you know, the big labs that we have test it. I haven't used it in my patients. I have had some inquiries about it, and I've certainly read a lot of the forums with people doing it. You know, it's just so it's so hard to measure. As you know, like, there's not even a good test, you know, to measure how quickly you're aging. Like, there's a lot of tests out there that sort of give you different, you know, answers, but there's not one great test, that does that. I will say that one of the best tests if you're looking at estrogen, and this might be applicable to the seventeen alpha, estradiol two, is the glyconage test, which are you familiar with that one? I've heard of it. So glycogen age is basically measuring these, these sugar molecules that are attached to your immune cells. And it's a marker of inflammation. It's like a marker of of systemic inflammation. And so you can get your your glycan age is like how you know, it's how you want a younger age. You know, if you're you want you want to be younger. But what we see with that test, and I have no affiliation with them, but with that test, when women go through menopause and their estrogen drops, you have this big increase in inflammation, and then their glycan age increases by, like, ten years in just a short period of time. And so you could actually test that and to see if the estrogen is working or not in their body. So that's one test that maybe with men with 17 with 17 alpha estradiol, we could do that test to see if it's helping with inflammation. Interesting. Yeah. So tracking regular blood work, regular hormones, is a good start for, you know, people just to get an understanding of of their hormone health. Like, they might, you know, not even experience any symptoms, but, just, you know, tracking is a good idea just to see what it where is that? I think it's a good idea, but there's a little bit of a caveat, which is that in women, if you're still cycling Mhmm. It's it's a little tricky. You know, you have to know exactly what day you are of your cycle in order to be able to interpret the estrogen and progesterone, you know, because from day to day, they they can go up or down. In perimenopause, where estrogen and progesterone are very erratic and you're not having regular cycles, it's the estrogen and progesterone tests are not very useful because they're so erratic. In premenopause where your cycles are pretty regular in women, you can test those hormones. Like, if you're having problems with fertility or, you know, if you're concerned about premature ovarian failure or things like that, you can test them. Testosterone, you can test in both men and women at any age, and that is helpful. And then other hormones like insulin and thyroid and cortisol and all all those hormones are not as cycle dependent, and those can be tested as well. And and that those should be tested for sure. I wanna take a quick break to let you know that you can now get my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. It contains 24 chapters ranging from the biology of aging to all the major chronic diseases such as heart disease, kidney disease, neurodegeneration, and I also cover over 70 clinically relevant biomarkers for chronic diseases and their optimal ranges. You can get the book from the link in the description. With, men, there's, like, less of this, certain specific age where their hormones drop off the cliff, so to say. Yeah. But, you can you can see, like, you know, 90 year old grandma with also pretty high testosterone levels. So what determines then, like, men's, hormonal aging? So men's testosterone, just like women's, it so part of it's made in the the gonads. So the ovaries and testes make some testosterone, and then the adrenal glands also make testosterone. And then there's a little bit of testosterone made in the, like, peripheral tissues. But adrenal glands and the gonads are the primary place. So with men, yeah, it's a slow it's a slow decline in testosterone in general. However, I will say that, you know, I see a lot more men now than I used to that that are coming in at a younger age with, like actual low testosterone. And and I think there's several reasons for that. I think that part of it is lifestyle. You know, we're not doing the things that increase testosterone in men like heavy lifting and moving your body a lot and getting sunlight and getting, you know, all the micronutrients like vitamin d and selenium and zinc and those kinds of things. And also we have, you know, the more stress you have, the less you sleep, the less testosterone you make. So that so all of those things I can contribute to low testosterone in men. And then also we have a lot all of the endocrine disrupting chemicals in the environment, which I think people are finally starting to say, oh, yeah. Those really are bad because we've known they mess with your hormones for years. And I think the combination of those two things has made it so that men's testosterone is, you know, it does seem to be going down over the last, several decades. How much is it? Like, it's I think it's, like, something like 25% lower than in the beginning of the season. Say as low as 40% lower than in the last fifty years. I think you have to be a little careful because we all we are testing testosterone a lot more than we used to. You know, in fifty years ago, we weren't testing testosterone very much. And the way that we the way that we tested is different. The lab test that we do now are more are very are much more specific and accurate than they used to be. And so part of this may be lab kind of lab error, like we're catching more low testosterone because we're testing for it more and the lab tests are better. But I do think that it's probably true that it's that it actually is going down also. Yeah. I mean, would make sense, like, much more obese and overweight people, less sunlight, more time indoors, sedentary. Yeah. More processed food diet, and yeah, the microplastics and stuff like that probably also affected. Yeah, absolutely. Yeah, they found like microplastics in testes and ovaries and, I mean, everywhere at this point, right? Yeah. In the brain as well, like 0.5% plastic is, what they found right now. It's so crazy. I'm always, I'm always yelling at my kids. You know, my, my son, for some reason, he's 15 and he loves using plastic, these plastic plates. I don't even know. He just, he's obsessed with them. And I'm always telling him, please stop using the plastic plates. And my kids are always like, yeah, we have a, you know, a credit card's worth of plastic in our bodies, and they just laugh. And I'm like, that's not funny. That's not funny. Yeah. Yeah. But then the reference ranges also then, like, they've keep kept, decreasing it to accommodate the lower levels then. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. That the major labs have yeah. The reference ranges for any lab, you know, it's based on kind of what's the normal for ninety five percent of the population at that time. And so you you know, in order to be in the normal range, you have to be in that middle ninety five percent for that population. So that alone is interesting. Right? Because you only have two and a half percent of the, you know, very high and very low on the edges. And everything else when you test these hormones is considered normal. And so that's a pretty big range. It doesn't tell you anything about, you know, how healthy they were. It's just what's normal right now. And so in the last, I think it's in the last ten years, five years maybe, they had to shift the testosterone, normal range down to accommodate the new normal that is the testosterone in men in the population. And what what's the, like, the what's considered to to be the, like, hypogonadalism so that you you're, like, a candidate for TRT? What's the level for that? So it it's currently about 250, in The US, and that's the total testosterone. It used to be closer to 300. Three fifty was considered, you know, low. But, you know, obviously, that number that number is low. 300 is low. 400 is even low. Like, you know, we we treat depending on the person and their age and what else they're doing, we consider we we really want testosterone to be kind of middle to upper end of that reference range if possible, but certainly starting with lifestyle and especially in younger men. Yeah. Yeah. What I've noticed is that it also just is very kind of subjective. Right? Some people feel fine with a testosterone of 500 Yeah. And other others are kind of struggling with 700 or, you know, 800 as well. So it's kind of, yeah, subjective in that sense kind of It is. In English style as well, like, how much you sleep and Yep. What are your micronutrient intake and the sunlight and those. Yeah. And we know from studies that the testosterone serum level does not, like you said, it does not, does not mean that you feel a certain way. Like, you can have a high testosterone serum level and you could still feel bad because you could have, you know, the receptors could be resistant to it. You could have other chemicals that are competing at the receptors. There's all different variations of so that's the serum testosterone level or any hormone. All it's showing you is one piece of the puzzle. It's not showing you what's happening at the receptor where that testosterone has to bind, you know, whether it is accepting it, whether it's actually binding or not, and it's not telling you what's happening downstream in the cell. Like, what is the cell doing when the testosterone binds to it? Is it making changes? Is it you know? So there's all kinds of things we can't test. So we have to use a combination of how are you feeling, you know, and what are your your serum levels look like? Or, you know, there are other tests, salivary tests, things like that that can be done as well. Yeah. And first try to fix it naturally like maybe you have like just bad sleep habits and, some nutrient deficiencies or something like that that need to be fixed. Yeah. And I think, you know, in men especially with testosterone, you know, lifestyle does go a long way. It's different than women with estrogen and progesterone, but but testosterone, I think for both sexes, but especially for men, it's been studied that there are things you can do to increase testosterone to a point to depending on what the cause is. You know, if the cause is that your testes are not working because you had the mumps when you were a kid or you have, you know, you had an injury or they've just gotten really old, then no amount of lifestyle is gonna increase testosterone. But if it's a problem with sending signals to the testes from your brain, then lifestyle can make a big difference. Yeah. That's a good point. You know, I've seen on online, especially in, like, the fitness scene that young guys, like, in their twenties, own TRT, which wouldn't make a lot of sense unless they have, you know, some of this genetic or some, like, those kind of factors. But, you know, and, they're doing, like, a low dose TRT, but they're kind of or not even low dose. They're actually, like, a pretty high dose, but they're saying that it's TRT because if they out come out and say that they're taking steroids, then everyone would, like, kind of judge them. Nowadays, not not that much, but in the past, they would, like, judge them out. If they were, you know, openly taking steroids, so they're like, I'm taking TRT. I'm not taking steroids. It's kind of Yeah. Kind of the deep note nowadays. Yeah. And the problem, obviously, and I try to avoid giving the 20 or 20 or even, like, 30 year olds TRT because it does shut down your own production. So if you're still making testosterone, you know, your body is pretty lazy. So if it's getting it from somewhere else, then it's like, well, why would I make it? Like, this this is much easier just to get it from somewhere else. So you're not you know, it doesn't shut it down forever, but it shuts it down, while you're taking it and usually for at least a month or so afterwards. So it's always better in younger guys to work on lifestyle and then maybe even something like like clomid or inclomiphene, or HCG or something that is basically increasing the signal to your testes to make testosterone. Those can be done, you know, for a period of time as well if needed. Yeah. What what age would you think then is, like, reasonable to start considering TRT for men? I mean, my soft answer is about 40. But even that, like, a lot of guys in their forties still respond really well to lifestyle or they still respond really well to, like, HCG, you know, injections and, and don't need testosterone necessarily till they're 50 or even or even later. So everyone's a little bit different and, you know, it depends partially on what the obviously, what the cause of test the low testosterone is. But I try to wait until they're at least 40 to give them TRT if I can. Yeah. You know, I personally gonna probably wait as long as I can. It's because what it is my theory is that, you know, starting it later probably has better longevity effects. So if you'd, like, maybe started in your twenties, it might not be that, you might like kind of milk the benefits already much earlier. Whereas if you started in your eighties or something or seventies, this is my theory is that, you know, maybe you're gonna extend the health span a lot more because your health span matters a lot more when you're like 70, 80, because, you naturally have much less muscle mass and metabolic health and bone density. So if you're gonna revert that to like a more youthful level with TRT at that age, then you're, like, extending the health span, like, a lot, longer in that scenario. That makes sense. I mean, I will say the only thing sometimes you know, I always opt for lifestyle first. However, in some men, it makes sense to do testosterone and lifestyle at the same time. Because if your testosterone is very low, then it's very hard to get motivated. Like, testosterone is all you know, it helps you get motivated. It helps you with with energy and mood, and it gets you out of your depression. And, you know, a lot of these things are tied to testosterone. So if testosterone is really low, you can just feel awful. You're achy. Your joints hurt. You're not sleeping. You're you have no motivation. Your mood is blah. And that makes it very hard to, you know, get to the gym and do the workouts and eat the right food. So some people, I find, we start them on testosterone. They it enables them to actually make the lifestyle changes they need to. And then eventually can they can get off of the testosterone once they get to a place where they're able to, you know, kind of function on their own well. Yeah. Makes sense. What about women? Like, are they ever, like, a a good candidate for getting some testosterone? Yeah. Absolutely. I love testosterone in women. Not all women need it. Like you said, there are older women in there, you know, who have high testosterone and don't need it. People with PCOS PCOS don't need testosterone usually. But, a lot of women as we get older do have low testosterone symptoms. And, you know, women make three times more testosterone in their, during their during their need in any given day than they do estrogen. We have more testosterone in our bodies than we do estrogen. And, unfortunately, there's not a, you know, a an an FDA or at least in The US, an FDA approved testosterone for women. But we have about eighty years worth of, of of use of testosterone in women that shows that it's not only helpful for, you know, improving libido and sexual health, but also all the things that helps men. Motivation and muscle building and fat burning and mood and and all of these things. So I do use it, quite a bit in women as well. And the doses will be, like, super smaller compared to men? About a tenth of the dose of men or if not even lower depending on, you know, the male if a male dose is maybe a hundred milligrams, intramuscular a week, then a female dose would be five to ten intramuscular a week. Or, you know, you can do creams. You can do all different ways. Gotcha. Are there any, like, risks with TRT? Like, one thing people worry about is a prostate cancer and maybe heart disease as well? Yeah. So those both of those risks have been disproven. Testosterone, we know does not increase prostate cancer even though prostate cancer is sometimes sensitive to testosterone. Taking testosterone does not increase prostate cancer, disease, incidence or severity if you get prostate cancer. And as far as heart disease, the the heart disease kind of myth that testosterone cause heart disease came from two studies, one in two thousand thirteen and one in two thousand fourteen, both of which were poorly done, both of which, you know, had so many method methodological flaws that one of them, hundreds of organizations, medical organizations came together to ask for the study to be redacted. Like, it was that bad. But because of those two studies, people got scared of testosterone for cardiovascular disease. We've had multiple other studies that have shown that actually testosterone therapy, when given an appropriate doses to the right person, actually reduces cardiovascular disease risk in men. So but, you know, unfortunately, people don't don't know that. A lot of people. Right. Yeah. So it has to do with better metabolic health and more muscle or insulin sensitivity and those things. Yeah. It's all of those things. It's metabolic health, so less less, you know, lower lower blood sugars, better insulin sensitivity, less visceral fat, which of course is gonna be less inflammation in general, less less atherosclerosis building up. There's, you know, it's it's kind of very similar to the benefits of estrogen in women. And again, part of it is because of the estrogen that you get from testosterone in men. Yeah. Yeah. I feel like, you know, for someone in their sixties and, you know, fifties 50, sixties, just TRT is probably one of the most powerful, you know, biohacks or longevity therapies just because of the all the other, benefits that you get from that, like the lower visceral fat and the better blood sugar and better lipids and more muscle, more energy, better sleep, all those things are just Yeah. That's from one all of that. I mean, it's it's you know, it's not it's not magic. Like, it's not gonna solve all your problems, but I absolutely think that that, you know, men when if they have low testosterone and they feel it and we replace testosterone, those first few months especially, it's like a light bulb gets turned on. Like, they come back, you know, after three months and are just like, I had no idea. Like, I had no idea that I felt so bad until I took something that made me feel so good. And then it's kinda it kinda plateaus after that. Like, it's not like they keep feeling better and better and better and better. But, it is pretty dramatic when you when you give someone who has low testosterone testosterone, they feel a huge difference. Do women feel the same with their estrogen therapy? With estrogen therapy, yes. But it's some it's it's a little bit more of a rocky road. I feel like it's it's harder to find the right dose for, you know, with women we're working with estrogen, progesterone, and testosterone, and there are multiple different ways to give it. So different delivery systems, you know, oral, transdermal, you know, different patches and gels and creams and pills and pellets and, you know, so there's all different ways to give it. It's three different hormones and every woman that seems to react differently. So so men are much easier patients in terms of, you know, you just give them one thing and maybe one or two different doses and then they generally do pretty well. With women, there's a lot of trial and error before we find that, like, sweet spot. But once we get there, usually, it's it makes a big difference to how they feel. Gotcha. Does so, like, one thing that also, like, closes with the menopause is, reproduction for women. Men can obviously get, children much later as well. So would those, therapies somehow, like, extend the reproductive window, or is there any research about that? For women? So in a women growth. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, in women, the well, giving hormones after menopause does not affect your ability to have kids because you don't have any more eggs. There is a lot of research going on. I I I not a lot of a little bit of research now going on, like the book institute and some other places looking at trying to slow down the rate of ovarian aging. And so, you know, our ovaries for women, they age two to five times faster than all the other organs in our bodies. I think you had a post about this on on Twitter or something, and I was like, oh, the ovaries age fast. And so they age really fast. And so but if we could slow down how quickly they age, then we could postpone menopause, you know, and and also potentially increase the time that you're able to become fertile and have babies. But, there is some research being done on how do we slow down ovarian aging. What's interesting about the ovaries, you know, you obviously, you lose one egg, you know, every month when you have when you ovulate and you have, you know, you have menstruation. If you don't get pregnant, you lose an egg. But what people don't realize is that within the ovary, at any given time, there are dozens, if not hundreds of these eggs, these follicles that are in various states of maturation that are never released by the ovary, but essentially they just die. They start to mature and then they apoptose and they die or they become senolytic cells. And so you're losing a lot of follicles every month, and you're not actually ovulating. So if we could slow down that process, like, the slow down the process of just wasting all of these eggs, then we could potentially delay menopause and and keep those hormones around longer and make you fertile for longer. That's interesting. Yeah. I've also seen that rapamycin in dog female dogs, you know, extends their reproductive window. Is Mhmm. Is there any research in humans? Yeah. They just did a there's a study that just came out last year. There was a twelve week study trying to see the effects on rapamycin in female humans and seeing if that, you know, changed. The the whole study is continuing to go on. They were looking to see if it was safe. So far, it seems safe. Now they're gonna try to see if what is what's happening to the that follicle number? Is it slowing down the release of follicles? You know, is it they they say they thought it was slowing down ovarian aging by about 20%, but I don't I think we still need more information. But certainly in mice, there are a number of compounds such as rapamycin, metformin, supplements like, NMN and resveratrol and curcumin and melatonin and some of these things that, you know, we in the longevity space have been, you know, talking about for years that have shown the ability to slow ovarian aging in mice. So, you know, potentially some of those things could work in humans as well. We just don't know yet. Yeah. That's interesting. And getting children later is also, at least for women, it seem to be associated with, longevity that they live longer if they're able to get children, like, even in their late forties. Yeah. And I don't know why that is. I think it's interesting. I I don't know if that's because they're just, you know, they have the like, are they healthier to begin with? You know, they are their ovaries are healthier, their hormones are better, and that's what the connection is or something else going on. I don't know. Yeah. I I would imagine, yeah, it's something that to be able to have children already in your forties, you're like aging slower Yes. Because of better health and healthier lifestyles. So, like That's true. Early early onset menopause is, you know, usually if you're slightly unhealthier or genetics or something like that, environmental factors. So why that kind of would make sense. And and we do know that, like, there's some things that can age the ovaries faster like smoking, you know, smoking and toxins and and, insulin resistance and obesity and some of these things that just we know age us faster are also aging the ovaries faster, which makes sense. I mean, the ovaries, and also mitochondrial dysfunction. The ovaries are the one of the most sort of mitochondrial packed organs in our bodies. And so we, you know, we see mitochondrial dysfunction happening, you know, all over our body as we get older, but it's it's really a problem in the ovaries. So if we can slow down mitochondrial dysfunction with maybe some of these supplements, or medications or other things, then that also may be one of the ways to slow down aging in the ovaries. Right. What about DHEA? So that's another, like is the like, the main androgen in the body. Mhmm. So DHEA yeah. I think that the the research on DHEA is kind of mixed in terms of how useful it is as as a as a supplement or as a, you know, as an exogenous hormone that we give. DHEA is the precursor to both, to testosterone and then eventually to to estrogen in men and women. And certainly you can take and in The US, it's over the counter. You can take DHEA. I think it can be helpful for some people, especially if you have a lot of stress or autoimmune disease or things like that. I don't think it's you know, in men, it's not as taking DHA does not increase your testosterone level very much in men. It it may in women a little bit more, but I think it's kind of it's not my favorite hormone, but it does have some uses. Right. So you you wouldn't think that it has worthwhile to, like, supplement or something? Because you can get it, like, over the counter, I think, in most places. I I think it really depends on what your situation is. I mean, there are there's like there's some research, for instance, in the fertility space and even and even the ovarian aging space that DHEA may be helpful, for fertility and slowing ovarian aging because it helps with some of the signaling from the brain. So there's, you know, there's specific cases where maybe it makes sense, and I I don't hate it. I just don't think that it is, like, going to solve all your low testosterone problems, you know, in everybody. Mhmm. Yeah. Makes sense. And, yeah, like, taking DHA is not gonna increase your testosterone anyway. So it's not gonna work. In women, it doesn't. Yeah. In women, it can because it's there's a little bit. But in men, it doesn't make a difference really in testosterone. Mhmm. Gotcha. And, progesterone and pregnant hormone as well, they're like often, talked about in that context as well, but, they're not like the main hormones. Yeah. Pregnenolone is is like, you know, is the main hormone that makes progesterone. Progesterone is, you know, you for women is fantastic. And I do get you know, you have to take progesterone in women if you have a uterus and you're taking estrogen. You don't have to take it if you don't have a uterus. However, progesterone had there's receptors all over your body. And I think that, you know, if you're on estrogen, you probably should take progesterone as well. It really counteracts, you know, it's kind of like the yin and the yang with estrogen. It's very calming and and, you know, kind of helps you sleep and it's relaxing. So it's great for women. In men, I don't use progesterone. I'm certainly there are some people who've taken it in low doses for to men to try to help with sleep. And I you know, I've heard mixed things about it. High doses of progesterone in men can, can cause you to be infertile, and it's it's it's can cause erectile dysfunction and and all kinds of problems. So we don't give it to men that much. Interesting. D h DHT. So, like, that's the most powerful androgen in the body, and that's, kind of put put in the camp of, like, hair loss and, other problems. So Yes. I would imagine, like, most people probably aren't doing any DHT therapy or or something like that. You know, some people do. And I in fact, I follow on on Twitter. I follow a lot of these, like, gym bros, like, these gym you know? And they're a lot they're very smart. Like, a lot of them are very are very, smart. And a lot of those guys do use DHT just by itself because as you say, it's it's stronger than testosterone as an androgen. And testosterone gets made into DHT by a hormone called five alpha reductase in your body. So you do have, you know, men, do have and women too, but men do have DHT. It is important but it can contribute to, to hair loss and male pattern baldness. It can contribute to, you know, acne and and things like that as well. And in women, it's oftentimes that one of the causes of things like not just hair loss in women who have high testosterone, but it can also cause acne and it can also cause, hair growth, like, you know, beards and things growing on women. This is all DHT. So it's very strong, but it has a lot of benefits too. It's great for libido. It's great for muscle building. You know, it's, it's a generally helpful kind of hormone for the rest of your body. Yeah. It's it's yeah. Like, might have riskier options. Depends on the goals. Like, so it so wouldn't have, like, any, like, longevity benefits, I would imagine. I don't know. I know. I need to read more about it because I've I've just started in the last couple in the last year or so seeing people using DHT. I've never prescribed DHT to just anyone, and I haven't looked deeply enough at what happens when we give men specifically DHT. I don't I I've heard anecdotally people say it's fantastic, but I don't really know that from studies. Right. Speaking of, like, the Gymborees, so, like, a lot of you know, there's different ways to take testosterone. Most of them, like, inject it. There's also, like, all the steroids or anabolics. And I've heard that they have, like, much worse effect on your, like, lipids and, and liver enzymes and stuff than inject injectable testosterone. So, like Yeah. So there's a couple of well, so the older forms of oral testosterone, it was it was a a methylated testosterone that used to be available to for men and and women had taken it too, but mostly men. That one was not good on their on the liver. It would get you know, it goes through the liver, gets metabolized, and it it caused some, lipid problems as well as liver problems. So we don't have that anymore. We don't give it anymore. The most common way to get testosterone in men is injections either intramuscular, like, once a week or twice a week, or my favorite is just subcutaneous, like, little bitty needles, and you do it maybe three times a week. You don't need to do as much, and it's it's it's less painful. You can do creams also, which are also, I think, work well for men and women. There is a new testosterone. It's called testosterone undecanoid, which just came out in the last couple of years. That it is oral testosterone for men, oral, so it's a pill. But it doesn't go through the liver. It actually gets absorbed by your lymph nodes. So it bypasses the liver and doesn't cause the problems that, the other one did. And the benefits of that supposedly, and I haven't used it a lot but I've I've heard some talks about it, is it doesn't, it doesn't suppress your FSH and your LH. So the hormones coming from your pituitary gland down to your testes that tell your testes to make testosterone. If you take injectable testosterone, it's turning off those signals, which is why you don't make your own testosterone. But the undecanoid, because you're taking it you're taking it, like, maybe in the morning and in the middle of the day, and then you're without it for a period of time, and so you have, like, these kind of ups and downs, it doesn't suppress your FSH and LH as much and seems so there's the question about maybe it's not suppressing your fertility as much as well. So there's still more to learn, but I think that there are some potential advantages to that. Yeah. Like, nowadays, you have, like, a TRT clinic almost, like, on in every city, at least in The States. And it's, like, very easy to find, like, a professional and who would, prescribe you the right testosterone for you. And you don't you don't have to, like, get there online from some sketchy website and Yeah. That's gonna be Yeah. I mean, I definitely, you know, other you've got we've always had research peptides and, you know, medications you can buy from India and things like that. But I would, you know, I try to discourage that just because you never you really don't know what you're getting unless you're sending it to a lab yourself, to see what it is. It's you know, I've done it. I'm not saying I've never done it, but I I think it's a little bit scary to do that. Yeah. Like, the risk risk reward benefit is a bit, low. Yeah. Exactly. Right. Where where can where should people, like, start then? Like, okay. They're not ready to jump on the on the hormones yet. They're not maybe old enough, or they just don't want to do it yet. And, okay, they wanna optimize their lifestyle for the best, like, hormones. So, like, what would what what what should they do for both men and women? I mean, it really goes back to the basics, the things that you hear about, but, like, the things that I see you doing on social media. You know, it's it's lifting heavy weights and and exercising, keeping your belly fat down, keeping, making sure that your your stress is down because it's that cortisol and then sex hormone relationship is so you know, when cortisol is up, your sex hormones are down and kind of vice versa. So keeping stress down, sleeping well, you know, and then making sure you're getting enough for testosterone. It's, like vitamin d, zinc, and selenium are the three, that are the most closely tied to making those hormones. Most people have enough of those things, but some people don't. So making sure you get enough of those in your diet or through supplementation. And those are really the main things. I don't find that supplements work all that well for testosterone. I mean, you know, some people talk about tongkat ali and some of those supplements, and they may help a little bit, but they're not, you know, they're not gonna get you from 300 to 700 or 800 or something like that. Mhmm. Right. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. You know, for some people, it might like if they fix their stress or sleep with a certain supplement, then that can maybe transform their Yeah. Figure. I think, like, one of the biggest reasons why you might have lower disaster is usually, like, chronic stress or sleep deprivation. Yeah. And those, like, even if you're, like, lifting heavy and, you know, exercising, but you're not sleeping enough, then it kind of still is, not gonna be, optimal. Yeah. That's actually a good point. I do like supplements to help you with your lifestyle goals. I think, you know, there's I think there's a lot of great supplements out there. I mean, I have a supplement company myself. I don't like supplements just to directly try to increase testosterone. Right. So I think that your point is completely right. If you can take, you know, if adaptogens help with your stress and then that helps your testosterone, that's great. Same thing with sleep supplement. Same thing with, you know, I love creatine for muscle building and that can help as well, but, like, it's not a direct relationship. Yeah. Are there any like peptides that would increase estrogen or testosterone? There are some that are studied, like there's some upstream, peptides like gonadoreline, which I haven't used much, but it's working up, you know, it up near the in the brain. There are some peptides like kisspeptin, which is supposed to help, sit with sending signals to the the testes or the ovary, which I haven't used either. Those are both of those are are not easily available or at least because Peptan's not in, like, compounding pharmacies. They're kind of research. It's kind of a research peptide right now. So in general, there's not a lot of good stuff that I've used. Although I know I have heard of some things that are coming out. Right. HGG isn't a peptide, but it's often used to, like, help with kick starting the production of testosterone. Yeah. Yeah. HGG is can be really effective. That's also called Pregnyl in The US. You know, initially, approved for, for increasing fertility in women just like clomid or inflomiphene. But hCG is a it's an injection that you do a couple of times a week, a subcutaneous injection, and it it basically acts like, luteinizing hormone. So it it kinda sit it goes down to the testes and, and tells them, hey, we need to make more testosterone. So it's a it's a good way, especially for younger guys, to increase testosterone production. And it also can be helpful as a it's kind of a an adjunctive therapy. If you're giving testosterone to someone, to a guy, and you still want them to make some of their own testosterone, you can give them, some testosterone, but then also give them HCG. And and in in theory, at least, those work together really well. Gotcha. Would you, like, start someone with HCG before they go on TRT? Or You can. I mean, I I it's I've done it all different ways. I think it's always nice to if they're if they're still pretty young, like less than 50 or so, then HCG by itself might be enough. Like, you may not even need testosterone. And so I I love to start with that. The problem is it's getting harder and harder to get, and it can be pretty expensive. It used to be that we can the compounding pharmacies could make HCG, and you see you get it pretty cheap. But now you have to get it, through the, like, pharmaceutical product, which is a lot more expensive, and insurance is not gonna cover it for men. So that's the main problem with HCG is it's hard to get at a reasonable price, but it does work pretty well and it's very safe. And it can be given, like, as as a standalone or, yeah, with testosterone. Gotcha. What do you what do you think about, like, growth hormone? Like, that's also also often used in these longevity clinics. Yeah. I I mean, I think that there's a couple of different options. There's there's the growth hormone secretogog, so things that increase your own growth hormone production. So for instance, you know, sirmirellin or tesamorellin or epimerrelin with CJC twelve ninety five, those are all peptides that will increase your own growth hormone production. And, I think they're pretty safe. I think they can be really useful. Again, you know, especially in that 40 year old person, if you wanna gain a little bit of muscle or build some more fat or, you know, get rid of joint pain and sleep better and some of that can be effective. Actual growth hormone, just HGH, is also very effective. And even at low doses, you know, I've seen a lot of helping with just getting rid of visceral fat, and and getting burning fat even if you're not, you know, building up huge muscles. It is hard to get because, at least in The US, the the medical boards and things don't love for us to hand out HGH, to everyone. But there's actually a a fair number of benefits from it. However, there's also the potential, you know, on the on the flip side in the longevity space, everywhere. You know, like, well, we don't want your IGF one to be high. We want it to be low because people who have low IGF one, they live longer. So there's this very interesting, like, sort of, you know, back and forth about whether, you know, you wanna increase growth hormone or not. Yeah. Like, low IGF one can have, you know, risks if, it increases frailty and low muscle mass. But I guess if you if you have normal and high muscle mass and bone density, then then you probably don't need the extra IGF one as well. Yeah. I think that's fair. I think that pro I mean, to me, the muscle building benefits of of making sure that you you know, having enough muscle is the most important thing. And bones eventually are are very important as well. So I think that the anabolic nature of these growth hormone and and these secretagogues are, I think that probably outweighs the, like, the longevity, you know, benefits of having a low IGF one. If if it that if the choice is frailty versus muscles, then I choose muscles every day. Right? Yeah. Yeah. Like, it's it's, you know, ironic if, like, people who are, like, on a low protein diet and, and trying to restrict their calories too much, like, if they died to, like, a hip fracture or something. And, like, that could have been prevented if you just ate enough, protein and calories. Well, it's one of the big debates, right, in the longevity spaces, like, what's, you know, some of the longevity guys, like, like David Sinclair, like, is all about, you know, he he's vegan and he, you know, kind of a fairly low protein and, I think he works out. But, you know, there's there's a lot of, some there's some research, at least in animals that that says the caloric restriction and low protein and all, you know, low low IGF one, all these things, restriction and low protein and all, you know, low low IGF one, all these things are good for longevity. But then, of course, we know also, at least in we've as we've seen in humans that, that muscle building and not being frail, is and higher protein maybe is good for longevity. So we kinda have to figure out, you know, where to go with all of that. Yeah. Kinda find a balance, with all those things. Are there any, like, other secret Mexican hormones? I don't know if I'm thinking of this, but, I'm not aware. Secret Mexican hormones. There's not you know, I get asked a lot about yam cream, which is only I I it is actually from Mexican wild yams, which is why I bring it up. Yam cream is something that a lot of women will put on in, in, you know, in perimenopause, menopause thinking that's gonna help with progesterone. But, but it doesn't actually do anything. The yam creams are that you can get over the counter don't help you make progesterone. So I will say that. I I you know, I'm interested in some of the other, like, the other drugs that we're, you know, we're looking at off label potentially for longevity, like rapamycin for sure, the GLP one agonist, the metformin, the SGLT two inhibitors. So I'm some of those drugs that are already out there that are, you know, kind of being repurposed potentially for longevity, I think are interesting, but they're not they're not hormones. Looking into the future, so, like, gene therapy, is there, like, any avenues by which, like, gene therapy could help with, I don't know, preventing menopause in the first place or kind of preventing the drop off in estrogen or something like that? Like, have you paid any attention to that space? I haven't no. I haven't seen anything in gene therapy about it, although it's I'm not an expert at that. I I do I I do wonder if something in the, like, cellular reprogramming space could could do that. Like, if we could actually reprogram the ovaries and the cells within them to act like more youthful cells, like, would that make a difference? I I don't I haven't seen any research about it, but that that's interesting to me. Yeah. I mean, because I would you know, being realistic, then gene therapy is probably, like, one of the only things that will dramatically, like, extend, lifespan in humans and Yeah. Like, dramatically extend, vitality and health span as well, like, that you could, you know, be as fertile. And as as what I tell as a 20 year old, when you're, like, a 100 years old, you know, that's only gonna happen with the gene therapy. It's not gonna happen with, you know, healthy lifestyle. Yeah. I'm excited to see what coming out there. It's a little scary, but I think it's also very interesting and exciting time to be in medicine. Yeah. Yeah. Well, we'll have to do a follow-up focus on that in ten years. Absolutely. Yeah. But, yeah, we can start wrapping up. Where can people learn more about you and your work? So I'm very active on social media. Instagram, especially doctor Amy b Killen is my handle. I'm also on all the other platforms as well. I have a couple of different websites. Doctoramykillen.com is my kind of main website, and then that'll take you to my clinics, my supplement company, my projects, like all the different things that I do. You can get to it from that website. Awesome. We'll put the links in the show notes. And the last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you adopted sooner? The the most important habit I think is getting a full eight hours of sleep every day and then getting up and walking out in nature sometime during the day. Mhmm. That's two habits, but Yeah. Yeah. Those are, like, yeah, fundamental. Like, if you're not sleeping enough, then everything is gonna be more worse. Yep. Alright. Well, this, it was great talking with you. And, yeah, looking forward to your future book. Thanks so much. Have a good one. Thank you. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Sim. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.