Taurine has had a rough few weeks. This week you had a new study in the journal Science showing that contrary to popular belief, taurine levels don't decline with age but they appear to actually increase. And a few weeks ago there was a study that implicated taurine in leukemia. Does this mean that everyone was wrong about taurine? In this video, I'm going to break down all the new studies about taurine and I'll update my stance of whether or not someone should supplement it. Alright. So this new study in science was looking at taurine levels across aging in humans, non human primates and mice to see if they decline with age. It was previously shown that taurine levels decline with age and that low levels of taurine would be harmful to health and longevity. What they found was that circulating taurine levels weren't seen to decline with age in humans nor primates. There was actually a lot of individual variability in circulating taurine levels with some people seeing an increase in taurine with age whereas others didn't. For some reason, this has made a lot of people concerned about whether or not taurine supplementation is a good idea for healthy aging. Thinking that because taurine levels were seen to increase with age, it would mean that taurine would accelerate biological aging. However, these circulating taurine levels had inconsistent health outcomes, which means that there is no consistent relationship between higher taurine levels being beneficial nor harmful to health. There are many reasons why taurine levels might rise with age and also why you see a big individual variation between taurine levels. Taurine supports antioxidant defense and mitochondrial function. Aging increases oxidative stress, inflammation, and mitochondrial dysfunction, which could mean the rise in taurine is a compensatory physiological response to getting older. Aging also worsens kidney function, and it means the kidneys are less able to excrete taurine. Thus, taurine accumulates in the blood and tissues. So elevated taurine levels might be a sign of poor kidney function and not causing aging. Women were seen to have higher taurine concentrations than men, which might mean there's some sex or weight effects on taurine metabolism. Women typically have lower body weight and higher fat to muscle ratio than men. So it might be that taurine levels rise in individuals with higher body fat. It also means that higher taurine might not be harmful to aging because women typically live longer than men up to five to ten years. All of these factors can influence an individual's taurine levels, and it will also explain the inconsistencies between people's taurine levels. And after all, there was no relationship between taurine levels and health outcomes which means that circulating taurine had weak or inconsistent effects on muscle strength, body weight, organ health, or overall aging biomarkers. This doesn't mean that supplementing taurine wouldn't have health benefits. There are dozens of randomized controlled trials showing that taurine supplementation improves metabolic syndrome, lowers inflammation, lowers blood pressure, and lowers blood sugar. There's even evidence that taurine supports exercise performance such as aerobic endurance, strength, and exercise recovery. All of these studies are still valid and they support the idea that taurine supplementation has various health benefits in humans. Especially among people with poor metabolic health. It's also true that taurine supplementation has been seen to extend lifespan in mice. In 2023, it was shown to do so by fifteen percent and health span by twenty five percent. The mice getting taurine had better organ function and lower prevalence of various hallmarks of aging. What was refuted was the idea that taurine levels decline with age. And these low levels of taurine are what drive aging and disease. Whereas the new study showed this to not be the case. There is apparently a clinical trial looking at the effects of taurine supplementation on markers of biological aging in middle aged humans. But this study isn't published yet. So we don't know if there are any effects on humans. But based on the current literature, taurine supplementation is good for metabolic health, inflammation and exercise performance. Let's also talk about the other recent study that implicated taurine in leukemia, which is a type of blood cancer that originates in the blood marrow. They saw that the taurine transporter might promote cancer development because bone marrow cells are able to produce taurine. They injected leukemic cells to genetically modified mice with the taurine transporter and mice without it. Basically, to see if the mice with the taurine transporter experience accelerated leukemia development. The mice with the taurine transporter died significantly faster than the ones without it. This does support a role of the taurine transporter in leukemia progression and fatality. They also saw in leukemia patients that individuals with a higher expression of the taurine transporter had lower survival than the ones with lower expression. However, you also see that normal people without cancer don't have elevated expression of the taurine transporter. Whereas in leukemia, there's a significantly higher expression of the taurine transporter. What it looks like is that leukemia increases the expression of the taurine transporter to use for its own survival and replication. The cancer basically hijacks the taurine transporter. You see that also in many other pathways that are thought to be beneficial for longevity such as autophagy. Autophagy in a normal state maintains cell turnover and cleans the cells from debris. This can even have cancer protective effects. However, in cancer and malignancies, the cancer cells can hijack autophagy and use it to create energy for themselves. Autophagy doesn't cause cancer, but it gets hijacked during cancer. Another example is the process of growing new blood vessels also called angiogenesis. You obviously need angiogenesis for health and survival to supply blood vessels throughout your body. However, cancer can also supply itself with blood vessels to get nutrients via the same process of angiogenesis. So it's clearly not black and white with blood vessels causing cancer or not, and the same applies to taurine. It's more so that if you already have cancer, then these processes get hijacked by cancer and used for cancer's own survival. In a healthy normal state, there's no evidence they would cause cancer. What does it mean for taurine? There's no evidence that taurine would cause cancer. But if you already have cancer, the taurine transporter might be involved in leukemia progression. So it might be better not to take taurine if you do have leukemia or other types of cancer. They also didn't look that if taurine supplementation would increase the taurine transporter expression. Instead, taurine transporter appears to be upregulated specifically during a disease such as cancer. What's the final takeaway? Taurine doesn't promote biological aging, but there's no evidence it would be a biomarker of aging either. However, taurine has been seen to extend lifespan in animals. Taurine appears to have benefits in clinical trials on metabolic health and inflammation. But studies on its effects on biological aging in humans are yet to be published. Taurine doesn't cause or promote cancer. Cancer cells up regulate taurine transporters for their own benefit. There's no evidence that taurine supplementation would cause cancer. So what's my final verdict and update on taurine? I still think that taurine is one of the best supplements out there and these studies don't refute it. Check out my video about the top 15 supplements with human evidence you could take.