Hey. Welcome back. This is the last q and a of the year. Let's start. First question, is there a level of sports performance or training that you view as unhealthy? Can a longevity compatible training allow you to reach elite levels of sports performance? So anything any sports at a professional level, I think, can be unhealthy. So, you know, let's say chess or some esports or something that is not physical, I think at the elite level, you do have to sacrifice your health to a certain aspect, you know, maybe not your physical health even, just mental health, emotional health, physical health, they can all suffer at the elite level. But when it comes to physical sports specifically, then, absolutely. So let's say elite soccer players, although they are super fit, you know, they can still suffer from some health chronic health conditions later down the line. Bodybuilding is a very good example of that. You're in elite, let's say, physical health or physical fitness, at least like sports, strengths performance, but, bodybuilders die quite often. Obviously, that's because of abusing, like these, performance enhancing drugs, but that just kinda proves the point. At the elite level, you have to do things that damage your health, whether that be taking performance enhancing drugs, whether that be just spending hours and hours at the gym or hours and hours training, sacrificing your sleep, abusing caffeine, abusing other kind of things that, are damaging your to your health. So, yes, absolutely, elite sports is definitely harmful at at the most elite level. But interestingly, a lot of the studies on Olympic athletes or elite athletes do suggest that they tend to live slightly longer than the general population. So even though elite sports theoretically is harmful to your health, it doesn't really pan out in the real world, or at least, let's say, maybe maybe the top 0.1% and top 1% of the elite athletes might sacrifice their health to a certain extent. But, if you're more like a middle tier Olympic athlete or that you're, you know, super fit, but you're not absolutely sacrificing everything to win the gold medal, maybe in that scenario, you are you're still gaining a lot of health benefits. Now personally, I didn't think that, you know, as a regular person like me or you or someone else watching this, most people watching this, they can absolutely get very fit, and it's not going to harm their health. Let's say a VO2 max of 50 that's achievable by everyone pretty much, even people in their sixties. They can have a VO2 max of 50, and people with a VO2 max of 50 have have been seen to have a four fold or three hundred percent lower mortality risk compared to people with a much lower VO two max that's close to the, disability threshold. So just because some elite athletes might die sooner at, you know, at the top absolute peak fitness, I don't think it should be an excuse for people to just not exercise at all. It's more likely the case that exercising a bit more will be more beneficial for you than, harmful. Of course, you and I, everyone watching this isn't going to reach elite levels of sports anyway, or at least that's not our goal. You know, we have these, other lifestyle factors that prevent us from reaching true elite fitness. You know, we don't have the time. We don't have the, coaching. We don't have the finances or whatever the case may be, the opportunities to become super elite sports athletes. So, there's a, like, a self limiting factor already in in our lifestyle that prevents us from reaching this super elite fitness where it might become harmful. And we we will more likely just, down regulate our training before we reach that, super elite level of, fitness, if that answers your question. So for you and I, I think, generally, being more fit will be better for us, and it's very unlikely that we'll actually reach true elite level of sports performance, for compared to the actual athletes who spend six, seven, eight hours a day on on their sport. Next question. Let's say the theory is true that certain higher presence of amino acids do age you found in high amounts of meats like mTOR and methionine. How much could they take off your lifespan? Is it one, two, five, or ten years? So that's a pretty loaded question. I guess the question is, you know, even if it were to be true that a higher protein intake or higher amounts of specific amino acids like leucine and methionine, even if it were to be true that they do shorten your lifespan, how much is it? And, can you make up for it with other lifestyle factors? So based on animal research, protein restriction does extend lifespan, specifically restriction of, leucine and methionine, which are the most proteogenic amino acids, meaning that they help to build muscle the most, that they stimulate mTOR, growth pathway in the in the body the most. So, in animal research, these are the key amino acids that are responsible for the life extension seen in protein restriction. Obviously, in humans, it's a lot more complicated than that. First of all, mice and these other model organisms, they're not living in the free world. They're pretty much living in very isolated environments where they're safe from falls, they're safe from, bacteria, they're safe from other things that could, kill them. And, the reason is that because you you just want to control for the environment to see if it's the protein restriction or some not something else that, actually ends up killing them or shortening the lifespan. So in the for humans, it's a different story. We live in a free world. You know, we're we are exposed to a lot of different pathogens. If we're not eating enough protein, we're malnourished, we might die to these pathogens instead. So it's a trade off. And the same way with, frailty, if we're eating a low protein diet, then, we are at a higher risk of, dying to hip fractures and falls. So just because, protein restriction extends lifespan in mice or some other mammalian organisms, it doesn't necessarily mean that it is the case in humans. Now, personally, I do think that just eating on in enormous amounts of protein, especially enormous amounts of protein that has leucine and methionine is you know, first of all, it's not needed. Why would you eat something in insane amounts if it's not going to have any additional health benefits? We know from randomized controlled trials that, you know, 1.6 grams per kilogram, maybe up to two grams per kilogram of protein per body weight is pretty much all you is pretty much all you need to maximize muscle growth. So eating more than that isn't needed. Now, of course, 1.6 grams per kilogram is considered still a high protein diet compared to what the, general dietary guidelines recommend, but it that's the upper limit. That's the upper limit. If you eat less than that, you build slightly less muscle, but it's not like you couldn't build muscle or that you immediately become sarcopenic and, frail. Even if you eat slightly less, you can still easily build muscle. You can still avoid sarcopenia and osteopenia. So, there's no downside to eating slightly less. There's also no upside to eating more. So, it's just a common sense question in my quest in my opinion that, you know, why would you just if there is a potential risk, why take the risk? Why take the risk of eating 2.5 grams per kilogram of protein per day like a lot of bodybuilders do or some other, other diets would end up you making doing? So I would much rather, yeah, lean on the on the side of caution, reduce the protein to what would be the maximal benefit. So 1.6 grams per kilogram, I think, is the upper threshold for most people. And, anything below that, let's say, 1.2 to 1.4, 1.5 grams per kilogram is already going to be a pretty good amount as well. You can easily build muscle with that with, no issues. You just you're maybe not maximizing all the benefits. Now moving on from beyond that, you can also make up for some of the higher amounts of methionine and leucine intake by ensuring that you have other good glycine. So So glycine is another amino acid and, in these mice most studies, they do find that glycine counteracts some of the high methionine intake. So if someone is eating a high protein diet, they're eating a lot of muscle meat or something else that has more methionine and leucine, then increasing your glycine intake appears to make up for some of, that for, for life extension in in mice, at least. And glycine has a lot of other health benefits. It helps with blood sugar, helps with advanced glycation end products. It helps lower homocysteine, and, it also helps with visceral fat, which, can result from excessive, methionine intake. So methionine restriction improves insulin sensitivity, and it also improves visceral fat loss, but glycine could also have glycine could be like the missing link missing link in that. So personally, you know, I think yeah. To answer your question directly, then, is eating this very high methionine, high protein diet going to shorten your lifespan, and how much would it be? Now personally, I would say that if you eat something like over 2.2 grams per kilogram, something like 2.5 grams per kilogram, then possibly you could shorten your lifespan. That's just theoretical. I'm just basing it off of the animal studies and, what I personally would think, there's no there's no evidence really, like, no hard evidence to suggest that a high protein intake would shorten lifespan in humans that much, but at least based on some of the studies out there, you could I I would suggest that maybe a few years is not going to be, like, decades shorter. But on the other hand, you know, it depends a lot on your environment. Depends on, you know, if you're living in an environment with, where being more physically robust is important, where you being more having a stronger immune system is more important than in that environment, having a slightly higher protein intake might be better. And age is also quite, relevant. So lower protein diets in younger people, so younger than 65, aren't really associated with, shorter life expectancy and increased mortality. But in people who are older or over 65, these, lower protein diets are associated with a higher mortality. So if you're over 65, then a higher protein diet is more beneficial. If you're younger than 65, then it appears that you can get away with a lower protein diet. Maybe maybe in this stage of life, it would be better to lean more towards the lower end, not like a low protein diet, but not eating an insane amount of protein younger than 65, I think it would make sense. Over than 65, over the age of 65, it's safer to be eating a slightly higher protein diet. But, again, not eating an enormous amount of a protein, just just the maximal amount for muscle hypertrophy. So one point six grams per kilogram, I think, is is the optimal intake, the up the absolute upper limit for most people. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices, which are the bone charged red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes. They do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin antiaging, hormone optimization, pain management, and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes, especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the Boncharge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most regular turbulizers don't have the right wavelengths of light, which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Boncharge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research, and they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code seam, s I I m, for a 15% discount. Next question, is your goal hitting the longevity escape velocity, or would you even want to live significantly longer? What's your goal in this regard? Asking this because your channel is more about supplements and lifestyle than actual medications and finding the hallmarks of eating. Well, my goal is, yeah, to reach the longevity scale velocity. I think, I think it would be just if if it's possible, if there is such a thing as the longevity scale velocity, which means that if you survive until, you know, let's say, twenty forty, then, your likelihood of reaching the age of 150, 200, 300, etcetera, is very high because of the advancements in medical technology and science. So it just every year that goes by, you're able to survive for another year and beyond because of, medicines and, technology that keeps you alive. Now I think that, it's a very small likelihood that it is possible, at least in this century, But I do think that, it just I like the idea of, figuring out what causes aging and how can we extend human lifespan. I'm another kind of a person who just wants to be immortal or, is afraid of dying. You know, what I like is the science and, the the problem solving of of this because, solving aging and, how extending human lifespan, any lifespan is, just a very hard problem. It's, the most difficult problem we've ever had pretty much because, you know, we we are slowly figuring out how to treat and and, cure and prevent heart disease and diabetes and obesity and all these other chronic diseases, but, we've never figured it out or never come close to, solving aging and, solving life extension. So I think it's just the the most difficult problem ever in, more like a medical field. And I just like it as, yeah, like the problem solving component. So I'd I wanna, yes, stay alive to figure it out. Yes. In the process, it will be nice to, you know, live a few decades longer, maybe fifty, sixty, seventy years longer. You know, that is theoretically possible. Right now, there is no hard evidence that it would happen in my lifetime, but, I just, you know, like like the idea of trying to figure out that problem and research it. And the other part of your question, I have covered this idea a little bit on my channel. The reason I'm not, you know, making every video about it is because, you know, there's nothing really that would, dramatically extend lifespan in this technology and, more, medical field at the moment. So if there would be some breakthrough, you know, let's say, next week, there's a study that showed we extended the my lifespan by a 150%, which would be double as we've done so far, then, of course, I would be talking about it because it's a massive breakthrough and a massive result. But, you know, there just hasn't been any major breakthroughs in the field of life extension over the last few decades. So that's the unfortunate situation, and that is also the reason why I say that, we're not even close to solving the longitude escape velocity. Now, theoretically, it's possible. Maybe it's happening in next five, ten, fifteen years. But, yeah, as I said, right now, the only things we know will give you the biggest likelihood of reaching the longevity scale velocity are, you know, some exercise, diet, sleep, and, taking a few supplements for some health benefits. So, yeah, right now, it just comes down to the basics, and there's really nothing that that is proven to dramatically extend your lifespan. Although, you know, that's the ultimate goal of, any, you know, health intervention in my in my opinion. But, yeah, rest assured when we do have some new studies about some major breakthroughs in this field, then, you know, I'll be I'll be one of the first people to talk about it. Next question, why do you think of skin absorption for supplements like glutathione, vitamin c, etcetera? See, this seems to be a new thought about delivery bypassing the gut. So when it comes to, skin antiaging benefits, then, yeah, the topical compounds, do appear to be slightly better. So, topical vitamin c is better for your skin than oral vitamin c, and, topical astaxanthin might also be beneficial for the skin as opposed to oral astaxanthin. But, oral elastaxanthin still has evidence for skin benefits and, reducing photoaging and, helping with wrinkles and, skin, dryness, etcetera. So, you know, both work. I think, oral sub there's a few oral supplements that do have benefits for skin and aging shown in, randomized controlled trials. There's also randomized controlled trials for a few of them as topical agents, you know, topical vitamin c, retinol, topical guethan might also have certain some of these skin brightening effects, and, topical asaxanthin is slowly also becoming, more rolled out. So, yes, topical topical copper peptide GHK, for example, works better than oral GHK for skin benefits, but, they, both of them can have, effects on the skin at least. The oral oral compounds, like oral alexithanthin, you know, they also have some other auxiliary effects like, benefits on inflammation status, possibly lipids as well, and, eye health. So you're not gonna put astaxanthin topically into your eyes, but, you can take it as a supplement, and, that has been seen to improve, eyesight. So, you know, probably the most optimal thing is taking both. Taking oral oral orally, some of these supplements and, some of them can also be taken atopically. Next question. If the goal is antiaging or longevity, should we still go by the optimal range for testosterone, or should it go by the normal range that's based by age? So when we're talking about any biomarker, then, yes, you could compare yourself to other people of your age to see how well are you doing compared to other people of your age. Now we that becomes more relevant the older you get. So if you're a 70 year old man, having the testosterone levels equivalent to someone who is 30 years old is a significant, I guess, achievement because, other 70 year old men probably have much worse testosterone. They might have the testosterone of someone who is 70 years old, their own age, their chronological age, or even someone who is older, like 80 year olds. So if you are an older individual and you have the biomarkers including the testosterone or someone who is much younger then yes you are a healthier individual than other people of your age. So, comparing, you know, comparing those markers to your peers is a good idea but it's more relevant the older you get. But I mean, of course, if you're younger and you have the you're 30 years old, you have the testosterone levels of a 50 year old, you know, that's also not a good thing. So it works the other way around as well. So, yes, comparing it to your peers is a good way to gauge how well are you doing compared to other people of your age. But it doesn't really yet tell you if it is the optimal range. Because, yes, if you're a 70 year old man, you have the testosterone levels of a 50 year old. A 50 year old doesn't have the most optimal testosterone levels. The average 50 year old doesn't have the most optimal testosterone levels for lowest mortality risk and greatest longevity. So there is always, yeah, like, what's the normal reference range, what's the normal reference range for your age, and what is the optimal range. The optimal range should be, agnostic to your chronological age, if you if you get what I mean. The, most optimal testosterone level probably is equivalent to someone who is, you know, in their twenties. So, even if you are a 70 year old who has the testosterone level of a 40 or 50 year old, you know, that's a amazing achievement. You're healthier than other 70 year olds, but it's not the most absolute optimal range for testosterone for lowest mortality risk, if that makes sense. Now it doesn't mean that you're, you know, at a higher mortality risk than, than, other people, but it just means that, you know, it's just the nature of aging. If you're a 70 year old, then it's gonna be very hard for you to maintain or achieve a testosterone level of someone who is 20, which would be the natural peak of testosterone production and what would be also, generally speaking, the optimal range for testosterone. Now to give you some specific numbers, then, based on a lot of, these observational studies, then, a testosterone above 700 is associated with a lower mortality risk. So it's not insanely high. It's, achievable for someone who is 70 year old. It's normal for a 20 or 30 year old to have a testosterone or over 700. It's normal for 40 year olds or 50 year olds as well to have that. But there's no evidence that, a testosterone of a thousand or over a thousand or even 900 would be somehow more optimal for mortality risk. So, yeah, that's just one single biomarker. You can't, you know, base your entire health status on a single biomarker. You know, you could have insanely good testosterone, but you have also high blood pressure or low VO2 max or whatever the case is. So you have to look at all of these bio biomarkers, as many as possible, and prioritize, like, a more balanced set of biomarkers rather than, focusing on only single biomarkers and thinking that it's the end of the world, like the end all be all. Yes. Testosterone is, important, but, you know, you can still get heart disease with normal and optimal testosterone. You can still have diabetes with optimal testosterone levels. So, yeah. You just need to look at all other biomarkers as well. Next question. Can you explain periodization slash cycling of the supplements in more details? Should we take a pause in some? So personally, I don't think you necessarily need to cycle at least most supplements. So let's say something like Azaxanthin or omega threes or glycine. I think these supplements you can pretty much take year round without any breaks. They, they work better if you stay consistent with their intake. For example, omega threes. If you stop taking omega threes for even there's a recent study that showed that if you stop taking omega threes, then your omega three index, which reflects the amount of omega three fatty acids in your red blood cells, it dropped quite significantly already within a few weeks of not supplementing omega threes. So, omega threes are something that you pretty much wanna keep taking on a regular basis and rarely take, breaks from from them. Aztexanthin, the same way, Aztexanthin, is carotenoid, it can protect your skin against UV radiation. It, has, benefits also for for just protecting your eyes against blue light, for example, protecting your skin against, the sun damage and, just, improving your inflammation status, making yourselves more resilient against inflammation. So this is another thing that I think would be worthwhile to take year round without breaks. Creatine, all although is something that you might want to take breaks from. First of all, you don't need to take creatine the same way you need to take omega threes to maintain the benefits. Creatine saturate once you reach creatine saturation in your muscles, then you can stop taking creatine even for a few weeks and maintain all the benefits because your muscles are already fully saturated with, creatine. So if you're going on a vacation, you don't wanna take tubs of creatine with you, then you can easily skip it. Whereas it might be better to take your astaxanthin and omega threes with you to your vacation. Yeah. You you don't necessarily need to take the creatine powder. You can stop taking it for few weeks even and maintain all the benefits. And, with creatine there's also the thing that, it appears to reduce some of the benefits you get from BR2max training. So if your goal is to absolutely maximize your BR2max then for the time period of that, you should stop taking creatine because it makes it harder for you to increase VO2max. Now creatine is absolutely good and amazing for muscle strength and power. So in a strength building phase, in a mass building phase, creatine is, absolutely amazing. But in a phase where you're trying to increase your VO2max or cardio, then, you should stop taking it. Other examples are some of these antioxidants like NAC, even melatonin, vitamin c, vitamin e. So, these supplements, I think, should also be not cycled, but just not taken every day, not taken all the time, because, you know, first of all, a lot of these antioxidants can interfere with, some exercise adaptations, muscle growth specifically. So if you again, if your goal is to build muscle, then don't take antioxidants around the training, especially Berberine is also example of that. If you don't have some lipid or blood sugar issues, then, taking berberine around training, around excess resistance to exercise could result in lower muscle growth as well because it in inhibits, mTOR signaling slightly. So so, yeah, just don't take it around the training, for example. But, otherwise, you know, you could theoretically take berberine year round as long as you're just not taking around the exercise. So it kind of naturally will end up you taking berberine not a 100% of the year, but around 70% of the year if you just don't take it after your resistance training exercise and not after or not around the phases where you're trying to build muscle mass. Melatonin, again, is generally safe. It's not going to inhibit natural, melatonin production, so you could take it every day, every night. I personally just think that it it might be better to not take it all the time because you could develop more like a psychological dependence on melatonin. You think that you need it to fall asleep, but in reality, you don't. So the psychology around sleep is very powerful. You could think that you're gonna sleep worse and sleep worse, and you can think that you need the melatonin to, fall asleep or to get good sleep. So just for the psychological dependence, it's better to not take it, every night, in my opinion. Next question. How did you manage to stick with your routine in your twenties? I find it very difficult especially when doing things to stick to my diet. Now the reason I was, following a very generally healthy lifestyle already in my twenties was because I was I was, like, pretty much just starting my online presence in my early twenties already. So it was kind of, I had, like, skin in the game in the sense I was, I had a blog about, you know, this health, optimization and, different different kind of articles about, these various supplements or exercise and diets, etcetera. So that's where, you know, you have skin in the game. You're more accountable for actually following it yourself. And, of course, I was just naturally interested in it. I started to, get into, diet, exercise, etcetera after high school when, I was starting to lift weights, etcetera. So you just learn about nutrition and some supplements, how do you maximize the training, how do you maximize muscle growth and strength, etcetera. I think that's just what people will end up doing if they're interested in it. The same way if you, you know, start a business or something, you learn about the business, you get better at it and to get better results. The same way with, you know, dating or, you know, yeah, building muscle, exercise, all those things. You just get interested in it, then you try to get better results. So, yeah, I I I started to, I guess, build a business around health, and, that's why I was able to stick to it more easily. I will add more skin in the game. And when I started my YouTube as well, you know, that just made it made it more serious in a sense that, things are more serious now. It's, like, a legitimate, business. So, yeah, I just, you know, it paid off in a sense. It paid off to be healthy, and, it kept motivating me to continue doing that. And, of course, I would just naturally want it to be healthy as well. I just I didn't do it, just because of, turning it into, like, a a business, but I I did it also because learning about the longevity scale velocity as we talked about, you know, if you stay healthy right now, you can gain additional years of life in a few decades, but you need to reach, let's say, twenty forty, twenty fifty, twenty sixty, whatever the eight year is, you need to stay healthy until that age to reap the benefits of additional years of life down the line. So it's like the ultimate marshmallow test. You know, you can, stay healthy right now in your twenties and gain you you sacrifice ten years of life right now in hopes of getting fifty years of extra life later, fifty years of quality life later when, medicine and science, advances. So that's one way of looking at it as well. Of course, it's a combination of many things. Personally being interested in being healthy and, getting better results with exercise, You know, you just feel good as well with exercise. I didn't have any social pressure, I guess, to, you know, drink or something. I gave up drinking quite early in my early twenties, and, I'd never felt like any social pressure to do it, to uphold any social norms or something like that. And, yeah, turning into business, which has its, I guess, you need to actually be healthy as well if you have a health business. And, the last thing would be, learning about the longevity escape velocity and just, investing in your future health by being healthier already in your youth. Next question. You said you shouldn't do multiple red light therapy sessions per day. Do you mean the same area? Here's my situation. I do four sessions a day, but each time on different area. So I don't recall saying that you you shouldn't do more than one session of red light therapy per day. You know, it depends a lot on how powerful is your device. If you have just this, you know, handheld red light therapy device, then and it's not nearly as powerful as a full panel or a red light bed. So it depends a lot on, yeah, the intensity of the device, how far away are you from it. Is it immediately touching your skin? Is it, you know, one meter away? All those things, affect how long is safe for you to do it. But let's say, a standard situation, you have, like, a regular panel, a red light panel, you do it 30 centimeters or 40 centimeters away. Ten to fifteen minutes a day is completely safe. You could do it even longer than that. Thirty minutes I've done in the beginning of, when using regular therapy, I used to do it for thirty minutes a day, twice a day. Usually, like, fifty minutes in morning, fifty minutes in evening. It's kind of a new thing, then you're, like, really interested and excited about it. So, I didn't have any side effects or any any problems with it. Nowadays, I might do it for, yeah, ten, fifteen minutes, once a day. So, in your situation, covering it again in different body parts, that's, perfectly fine, and you're not really overdosing it or overdoing it. So, if you start to feel that some sort of, redness of the skin or some, some reaction, some rash or something like that, then that would be a sign that you're doing too much. But other than that, so the bigger problem is, yeah, if you just have the panel super close to you, it does emit some, radiation in very small amounts, similar like the sun would emit a radiation. So if you're just, you know, hugging it, very closely for one, two hours a day, then, yeah, that could be causing some, potential health issues. But even then, we we don't have any data about that. So I was just stick to ten, fifteen minutes a day. If you use it in different body parts, so you do the front, you do the back, then, that should be fine. Next question, what are your thoughts on the role and mechanism of stress in the aging process? Specifically, where's the line between stress we should avoid and stress that might be beneficial? How can we effectively manage stress and build stress resilience through practices like meditation and others? So, stress, yes, by definition is harmful, but, there's different types of stress. So there's, eustress that is beneficial, and there's de stress that's harmful. And usually, the difference between them is a dose. So, going running up the stairs for one minute is a positive stressor because it improves your cardiovascular health. It prevents you from spending too much time sitting. It improves your blood flow. It has a lot all of these health benefits for the brain, etcetera. You feel more energized, increases NAD recycling. But going for an ultra marathon arguably is de stress. You know, going for a 110 kilometer run is, very excessive and, theoretically is also harmful for you. Now, of course, some people are able to pull it off without any adverse health effects, But eventually, if you do it every day, for example, you're not gonna be able to pull it off, and you will suffer from some side effects such as, sleep problems. You potentially can have high blood sugar, high blood pressure, other health issues, joint issues, etcetera, if you just overdo it. So there's always the dose that determines whether or not something is harmful. Water, oxygen, food, in, moderate amounts, they're essential if you need them. In very large amounts, they're harmful. In very small amounts, they can also be harmful. You can, you know, starve to death or you can, die to, lack of oxygen, etcetera. So, there's always a sweet spot. So what is the sweet spot for things like exercise, saunas, intermittent fasting, sun exposure, etcetera? That all depends a lot on, the particular individual. So, with exercise, you do see that, if you exercise more regular, your stress resilience increases. And how do you know that? You can see that from things like your HRV, your immunity, your, resting heart rate, your, blood pressure, your insulin sensitivity, all those things improve if you do moderate amounts of exercise on a regular basis. If you're just completely sedentary, you, tend to have worse metabolic health, worse blood pressure, worse HRV, higher resting heart rate, which is bad, and, you're just in a worse health, objectively speaking, based on biomarkers. Whereas if you exercise a few times a week, you are not overtraining, you're not over, like, just killing yourself at the gym, then, you see the opposite. You see improvements in all these biomarkers. So it's important to, you know, track some of these core biomarkers to see if anything that you're doing is, more beneficial for you or more harmful. So let's say, HRV is a good metric of your nervous system balance, your autonomic nervous system balance, and cardiac function. If you see that your HRV is trending downwards from whatever is your baseline, then that is a sign that you're overdoing it. HRV usually drops if you're getting sick, if you're overtraining, if you're under too much stress, psychological or physical stress, or just, you know, some environmental factors as well. You're, exposed to a lot of heavy metals or some other pollution or something like that that can also lower your HRV. So, just looking at that simple metric, you can get a pretty good estimate of, whether or not something is too harmful for you. If you do too much sauna, your HRV might drop. If you do a moderate amount of sauna, it can actually increase. If you, are sleep deprived, you sleep five, six hours, your HRV is usually lower. If you sleep seven, eight hours, your HRV is usually higher. So, you know, that you could just use this single marker, the most easiest marker to track on a everyday basis. But other markers as well will be, relevant here. Things like your blood pressure, your blood sugar, your inflammation status. If you exercise a lot, exercise insane amounts, many hours a day, then, you can have high blood sugar, higher blood pressure, higher inflammation. Worse joint function. You feel that joints hurt more. So these are just signs of overtraining and you're doing too much. But the moderate amounts of exercise tends to, avoid that. And the same way with cold exposure, if you're doing a lot of ice baths, for example, every once in a while some ice baths are good for your immunity, they can lower inflammation, especially muscle soreness, they, can raise your HRV, They can, increase your mood. But if you do ice bath every day for tens of minutes, then, you can see a drop in your thyroid functioning. You just feel low energy and tired all the time because you're just exposed to so much cold. Your, immunity can drop as well because your body is just under so much of this, environmental stress. So the dose makes the poison. With saunas, if you do too much saunas, you can lose a lot of electrolytes, which, can result in muscle cramps. It can disrupt your sleep. But if you do more at a muscle sauna based on research four times a week for twenty minutes each session at 70 degrees Celsius, then, you see the opposite. You see much lower rates of heart disease, lower rates of Alzheimer's, lower rates of hyper hypertension, lower rates of mortality, and just overall better health outcomes. So, you know, there's no simple answer to this. It all depends on a dose, and what's the optimal dose depends a lot on the individual. How do you manage that stress? Yes. There are ways to, manage that stress with things like mindfulness. Sleep is, you know, very important. If you are doing a lot of exercise, you also need more sleep. If If you do less exercise, you need less sleep. If you're eating a bad diet, then, that tips the scale in the wrong direction, or you need more recovery as well to recover from the bad diet. So, the healthier your diet you follow, the more you sleep, the more just time you take for recovery, going for walks, just, letting your mind relax. Those things can, help you to recover from whatever stress, you're, encountering. But just, yeah, tracking your HIV, for example, is a very useful, easy metric to see whether or not you are doing too much or you're doing just enough. Next question, what did you against smog? Where I work, there's terrible air quality outside, and I need to spend fifteen minutes every day right next to the eight line highway full of cars while I'm waiting for transport. What can I do to prevent the harm? So, yes, air pollution, can be a significant factor in worsening health over time. So it will take many years and decades for you to actually, you know, have a significant impact on your health. Just the fifteen minutes of acute exposure alone isn't enough to, really cause serious harm. But over the course of decades, you know, it might. Now how do you mitigate the harm? Well, just outside of those fifteen minutes, you follow a healthy lifestyle and a healthy diet that will help you to mitigate a lot of the harm. So the healthier person you are, the stronger your immune system, the stronger your baseline cardiovascular health and the ER2 max, the better you're equipped to also deal with the smog or the fewer side effects you'll encounter from, breathing in smog and air pollution. Because, if you're already someone who has poor health, you have poor respiratory function, you have poor cardiovascular function, then the smog will just make it you will start to experience the side effects from the smog much faster, if that makes sense, because your baseline is lower. Whereas if your baseline is higher, it'll take you a lot longer for you to actually get any side effects, from that. So just optimize that. Now specifically of dealing with it than some larger amounts of antioxidants like n a c, vitamin c before exposure to those, smog and air pollution, other environmental, toxins, is going to be, useful. So if you have if you've loaded up on antioxidants before, then your body will be able to, deal with the inflammation and, things of that that ensues. NAC actually has also been seen to benefit respiratory conditions, so breathing related conditions. So this is actually via the perfect supplement option, for smoke or air pollution specifically. Now, with melatonin, there was a interesting study that men who got a hundred milligrams of melatonin before exposure to, radiation, so the the equivalent of few x rays, they exhibited much lower DNA damage. So about thirty percent lower DNA damage from the hundred milligrams of melatonin. Now air pollution doesn't work the same way as, x-ray radiation, but you can apply the same principle. For example, okay, if you're traveling with airplane or you're about to get an X-ray, some for some example, you could take larger amounts of melatonin before that to, mitigate some of the harm. Now I haven't seen specific studies on melatonin and air pollution and smog, but I would, you know, presume pretty, pretty confidently that, it would have similar effects that maybe not taking melatonin morning when you're waking waiting the car, but melatonin the night before. So taking five, ten milligrams melatonin the night before, would also mitigate some of the damage, because melatonin, even if it doesn't protect you against the smog in the morning, it can help you to recover from the smog in the evening while you're sleeping. So all of the detox or, repairing processes happen in your sleep, and melatonin is one of the key hormones that regulates that. Melatonin regulates your glymphatic system that flushes out a lot of these toxins and including microplastics, from your brain in your sleep. So, arguably, it could also work in, you know, helping with smoke or air pollution, to, clean your body from, you know, heavy metals. And as a last ditch effort, so, like, more immediate effects, a face mask, I think it is pretty reasonable. Of course, it's not going to protect all of the pollution, but at least it will, mitigate some of the smog. So, yeah, just wearing a face mask, add this n 95 face mask, for example, while you're waiting for the fifteen minutes, I think it will, you know, not a 100% prevention of exposure, but a pretty reasonable amount, I would, I would presume. Next question, what are your thoughts on prioritizing fast twitch muscle fibers instead of lifting heavy weights? So, yes, fast twitch muscle fibers are the principal types of muscle fibers that decline with age. So they drop the most and, the fastest and the earliest when it comes to other compared to other muscle fibers. So fast twitch muscle fibers, this kind of explosive speed, muscle fibers. Now, I do think that, well, first of all, lifting weights does recruit fast twitch muscle fibers. So if you're doing heavy squats, heavy deadlifts, heavy pull ups, you are using fast twitch muscle fibers. So you're, you know, not not utilizing, fast twitch muscle fibers if you're lifting if heavy. So if you're lifting something that's, you know, let's say twenty, thirty, 40 reps, then maybe you're not using fast twitch muscle fibers. But if you stay around five reps, three, five, up to eight reps, you are using fast twitch, muscle fibers. And there is research that, yeah, elderly people who do resistance training, they have more fast twitch muscle fibers than people who don't do resistance training. So resistance training and lifting weights absolutely will help you to maintain more of these fast twitch muscle fibers. But I do think that, you know, there's more than that. The actual speed so why is there this association between, people with fast twitch muscle fibers and lower rates of falling or, lower rates of, hip fractures? It's because if you have more fast twitch muscle fibers, you're able to, you know, if you're falling off the stairs, you're able to grab a hold of something or you're able to jump or, you know, whatever the case may be where you need to use these fast twitch muscle fibers. And the absolute most important principle of any sports training is, specificity. So if you wanna be fast, you need to train fast. If you wanna, you know, run a fast marathon, you need to run the marathon. If you wanna jump high, you need to train jumping high. Yes. Doing squats can increase your jump height, and a lot of NBA players and, you know, other, Olympic athletes, they do train squats in their training. It's not the priority in their training, but they absolutely do train heavy squats. But if you wanna actually jump higher, you need to train jumping higher, and the same way with any other plyometric or any other kind of explosive movement. So I think it's valuable for people to train speed and power just because of the sports specificity component. So you actually learn how to do these movements. The same way it's important to actually learn some balance exercises as you get older. Because balance, you know, you could be strong, but you can lack balance not because you're unhealthy or unfit, but because you just didn't train it. Right? So, training speed, balance coordination, proprioception, moving through the space in different ways, in unexpected ways, you know, that's why, like, team sports is such a good thing for health and longevity. Not at the elite level necessarily, but, you know, just just playing basketball, playing soccer, whatever, tennis, those are sports where you're doing unexpected movements. They're very chaotic. Tennis, you know, every swing, every, serve, they're all in different, you know, different positions, in different angles. So you actually need to learn how to be also, responsive to unpredictable movements and unpredictable scenarios. So I think that's actually more beneficial for your long term health to be doing something like tennis, soccer, basketball, baseball, whatever the sports you like rather than just to lift weights or rather than just to run on the track, if that makes sense. Because, just running on a track or just running on on a treadmill or just lifting weights, it's a very, linear linear, type of activity. You need more chaos. You need more kind of randomness as well in the movements to, because of the spore specificity, element. You get better at random movements and unexpected movements. But you need both. If you're just doing these chaotic movements and you're not lifting weights, then you're not better off than just doing lifting weights. Right? You need both. You need to be lifting weights. You need to be doing balance exercises. You need to be doing slow steady state zone two cardio by just, yeah, running down the track. But you also need to be doing unexpected types of cardio like tennis and, soccer or something like that. And you also need to be doing some sort of sprinting, some sort of, plyometric type of exercise where you're jumping different directions, etcetera. So they you need to be doing all of it. Last question is, if you were to go all out, what would be your supplement medication stack? So going all out, I presume, is, you know, if I have unlimited budget, if I'm just I'm gonna take everything that is out there that I think is gonna be beneficial. I would I think that's the question. So, well, a lot of the things I'm already taking, it's not gonna be, dramatically different lists. It's gonna be Azaxanthin, glycine, omega threes. You know, I would use NAC at some times of the year, not all the time, sometimes of the week, maybe a microdose every day. I would use melatonin every once in a while in a lot of cases. I would use creatine every once in a while. I would use lutein and zeaxanthin, taurine. I would, use, hyaluronic acid, collagen peptides, use, copper GHK, at least topically at least. I would use, ashwagandha maybe every once in a while, mostly for sleep. I would, possibly use glucosamine because there's some interesting research for joints, and it is associated with lower heart disease and mortality, but it wouldn't be, like, my big priority. But I would if I had just unlimited stack, I would use that. The same with MSM and, chondroitin, There are some evidence for joint health, but, the actually, the more more optimistic reason I would use them is because they have some skin benefits. So, yeah, I think the these joint supplements actually might be better for skin than for the actual joints, in my opinion. And, yeah, there's a few other supplements out there that I would probably add in into, like, a unlimited snack. Now the reason I'm not taking all of these supplements that I mentioned is because of mostly convenience. I don't wanna start popping twenty pills a day. It's just it will take too much time. It's a hassle to keep buying them again and, you know, the cost as well. If you just buy all these different 20 different brands, it's gonna add up. So, but I am aware of the research about a lot of these supplements, and, I've made a lot of videos about them such as, you know, ranking my 100 supplements from worst to best. There's videos about my ultimate supplement stack. If I were to have this magic pill, just a single pill, what would that pill contain? I have a video about that where I go through the research on a lot of the supplements that I mentioned here and, others as well. So, yeah, you can check out that video for more details. But, yeah, that will be it. You know, right now, I'm taking aaxanthin, glycine, magnesium occasionally, and, what else? Lutein zeaxanthin, I've, experimented recently as well. NAC, occasionally melatonin, occasionally creatine on and off. So, yeah, it's not really it's a much shorter list that I'm actually taking. But if there were to be a magic pill of single pill or a single powder, then, it would contain a lot more supplements currently in my stack. And the reason why I'm not taking them right now is because of mostly convenience and, just just cost. Alright. That's it for this q and a. Thanks for watching this video. You can check out my video about ranking the 100 supplements next.