There's a certain switch or like a shift around the age of like 65 that they see that a low protein diet actually increases mortality risk. Whereas, yeah, if you're younger, you can get away with lower protein. Whether or not it's optimal, you know, that's a different question. In ten years, we hope that we'll have some JIRA protective drugs. But I'll start with our, I would say, kind of landmark question when it comes to your vitalism. How long do you wanna live? I don't have any fear of this. I would be fine to live to 80, 100, 120. Like, they all sound fine to me. No one would really want to die, you know, in their sixties or seventies. I think the statistics say that the average answer would be something like 80 for most people. But I wouldn't mind to live like 150, 180, 200 either. Like, so I didn't really have like a hard cap on, the number. I'm not I don't want to live to the age of three fifty, 500 or something either. At least I don't set my goal to that. Right. Right. And you don't wanna be decrepit. That's for sure. Yeah. I guess, yeah, it's the quality of life, matters. Like, are you you know, how good is your quality of life? Awesome. Alright. So, one thing I was wondering about is, you know, you have so many measures that, you're aware of, you track, etcetera. Was that what was the change, if any, that created a lot of positive value in your mind that you couldn't measure well or that you you you there wasn't a good measure for that you could point to? Is there any change like that? So, I guess my tracking of these blood markers began something like six years ago. So I had something like six years before that I didn't track, you know, that regularly. So I don't know if, you know, certain interventions that I was already doing, how big an effect they had on my blood markers. But I think a few things that I personally think that improved or have contributed to my health are intermittent fasting, so like time restricted eating. So there's, you know, obviously, clinical trials on intermittent fasting improving a lot of different blood markers like cholesterol, lipids, blood sugar, blood pressure, etcetera. But, they're mostly done on people who have problems with them to begin with. So, like, people who are slightly overweight or who have diabetes or something like that. You know, I never had that, but I've been doing intermittent fasting for like ten years. So, it would be interesting to see what like, how they could have impacted some of my blood markers. But I personally think that it does contribute to slower biological aging and better blood work, even though, like, the clinical trials suggest that if the calories are the same, then there's no, like, difference in in those things. But I personally think that there might be, from my own experience, maybe, like, 10% difference. Awesome. So a lot of people here are probably, interested in improving their health and longevity, but, one thing that people find difficult is finding good, providers. So doctors, specialists, etcetera. Who is your doctor? Do you have a doctor? And who are the providers or specialists that you consult with? And and also, how has that changed now that you're a more known person and probably have more access than just an average person? I don't I don't have a, like, a doctor actually. I'm, I think I'm my own doctor. Like, I do all my own research and interventions. I mean, I I do think there are a lot of doctors out there with a lot of knowledge, from The States. There's also someone called Anil Bajnath, who's like the president of the American Board of Precision Medicine. So he takes it a bit step further that he also, you know, looks at your genetics. He looks at all these other multiomics, data to come up with your specific program for your health. So he's he would be someone I would use if I really wanted to, okay, go through all my genetics, go through all my family history and all my blood work history and come up with, like, what are things I need to work on. He would be, like, the person I would trust with that kind of, task. Awesome. Now, one question is around optimal indicators. So I've, done some of the things that you've done, but to, let's say, less intense level. And one of the problems I ran into was that there wasn't good evidence about what is optimal because often that has been researched. We live in a kind of sick care orientation from the medical establishment perspective for all sorts of reasons, many of which are not, you know, nefarious in any way. It's just kind of how things evolved. But what is your process for identifying what is optimal and how do you get confidence about what that is? We definitely don't have the optimal answer for blood work and not to mention the entire longevity field. We can only be, like, at level of confidence with certain things. We can be pretty confident that obesity, you know, is bad, and we can be pretty confident that hypertension is bad and diabetes is bad for your longevity. So, it's all like a degree degree of confidence that you have. Low confidence would be something like mechanistic data that is never proven in humans and, is like speculative, like theories. Like, yes, they're interesting and we can, you know, discuss about them. But if there's not a lot of human data, then we can't make any, like, conclusions about them. Whereas with with something like, yeah, high blood sugar, insulin resistance, and hypertension, you know, there's hundreds of studies correlating worse health outcomes with these conditions. So we can be pretty sure that, we want to avoid, let's say, these major comorbidities, for example. And and is is there so let's say you're looking at a new indicator that you haven't dug deep into before. Do you what's your process? Do you go through a lot of papers? Do you have any team members who help you do that? How do you reach the that level of confidence and decide where it is on the spectrum? Yeah. You it just comes down to looking at the available studies out there and assessing the quality of that study. So you need to, like, read it, analyze the methodology, and, look at the effect sizes. Maybe, like, a few yeah. Like, with these biological age clocks, for example, that's a good example that, they have studies that do correlate higher biological age scores with higher mortality risk, like a five year mortality risk. But, you know, so far, it's like a single population or, like, some sort of isolated population because there's also, like, a lot of noise with them. So there counterbalances those findings. So you have, like, some of these findings that this biological age score changes throughout the day, that it's higher in the morning, lower in the evening, for example. And, especially that the biological age rises after you've been infected with coronavirus or just a regular flu. Even if you get sick, then your biological age score goes very high. And if you test at that exact moment, then you're going to get a worse result and you're going to freak out, for example. So that creates a lot of noise that then jeopardizes their confidence in these other studies because it's could be just noise and, randomness. So that's why it's hard to say, like, that exactly this biological age score would be actually any worth it. Mhmm. Right? Yeah. That's great. Is, if you had a $100,000,000 to deploy, to try to investigate what is more optimal, among let's say three indicators or two indicators where the jury is more out, how do you deploy it? Or which which indicators would you choose to try to find out better? And is there any particular study you'd love to see run? Right. I guess the issue with, yeah, human clinical trials is that we live, relatively speaking, so long that it's hard to see whether or not it will actually make you live longer, a certain intervention or blood marker range. So, it would be have to be like a very long clinical trial, which is, you know, almost impossible to do and costs a lot of money. Probably this a 100,000,000 would go through, like, a single study, almost if you wanna do, like, a lifelong study. So the ideal study is that you have genetically identical twins. They follow different programs from birth, and then you follow them for, you know, until they die. That would be, like, the ideal study to see the effects of different diets or different blood marker ranges on their longevity. But, yeah, it's like a very difficult and impossible study to do. One thing I've been thinking is maybe you can, like, simulate it in some sort of with AI or in some sort of, simulation. You know, you can do those studies in bacteria and yeast and mice, etcetera. But if you could somehow mimic that or simulate it on humans inside a simulation somehow, you know, I don't know how it would be possible. But, you know, if you could do, like, some sort of simulation study, you can accelerate the timeline until their death, then you can maybe see some effects. But, yeah, To to give some sort of an answer, I would say that we would wanna do more clinical trials, even like short term clinical trials on different diets, different, blood markers, etcetera. Even like two year clinical trials are pretty good. Is there, is there one indicator that you think people are following that is kind of a red herring or a particular waste of time from your perspective that you feel a lot of people are kind of falling to tracking or, spending too much attention on? Kidney markers, there's, issue with the creatinine. So if you have, higher muscle mass, you eat more protein, you exercise, or you take creatine, for example, then your creatinine levels might be slightly elevated. But it's not indicative of kidney damage or kidney dysfunction. And, you know, usually, they calculate eGFR, which is the, estimated globular filtration rate. So that's a marker of kidney health, and they calculate usually from creatinine. So if you have more muscle, you exercise, you take creatinine, then your kidney health on paper would show off, as worse. But, in reality, it's because of this higher creatinine that is skewed by your exercise or muscle mass or whatever it is. So a better kidney marker is a cystatin c. So that one isn't affected by muscle mass and exercise. And you can also calculate EGR from cystatin c. So rather than looking at creatinine, you should like, people will wanna look at more Cystatin c and calculate EGFR from that. Awesome. Thank you. And, one, last compound question. So when you think about, advances in aging, in treating aging and understanding aging with science and technology, what is your mental model of the world in the next five years, ten years? You know, I mean, here in the Bay Area, some people think we'll all be AI pets in five years, so they're different mental models you're probably aware of. But how do you think what's your mental model right now for how things are likely gonna be in terms of our science and technology to address aging in five, ten, twenty years? And which, technologies, if any, are you excited about? Yeah. I think in five years, we'll be more utilizing things like stem cells, exosomes, peptides, hormones, and things we already kind of know that can work, deployed in a, like, a larger scale. In ten years, we hopefully will have some general protective drugs. You know, rapamycin is our candidate, but I think we'll probably develop better ones and, you know, GLP one agonists or something along those lines. Like that, not necessary for weight loss, but, I don't know, for inflammation or blood sugar or something else that goes wrong with age. So we have, like, a GLP one analog for for, hypertension or something like that. So that Or immune decline, for example. Yeah. Yeah. So something like that, similar technology. And in fifteen years, maybe something good with gene editing. Because, yeah, like the peptides, yeah, they're gonna be great for improving your joint function and maybe aesthetic aging and those things, but they're not going to make you live to 150 or something like that. And the same to GLP-one agonists, or these other geno protective drugs. They can maybe add ten, twenty years to a healthy lifespan, but they're not like this dramatic breakthrough in life extension that people are hoping for. Like, for that, we probably need something with gene editing or something, you know, whole body replacement that you're talking about. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Great. There are, so many questions and I thought having Seem and Joseph here together would be a very interesting conversation. But I'll just start, with something I'm, curious about. This is just kind of a very simple question, which maybe others, wonder about too. So how much do you estimate you spent on tests last year? And if you didn't spend them, I mean, maybe you get some freebies, you know, because you're content creators, etcetera. They just estimate what the cost of them would be. Do do you have a sense? So I did like a analysis of my protocol and stuff that I do a few like two years ago, and it was something like 10 to 15 k per year. So it's not like a massive amount, that would include supplements plus blood tests, gym membership, and those kind of things, excluding food. But, since then, I've, you know, done a lot more, so to say, and added a few more tests. But, it wouldn't be, like, exponentially more for me at least, you know. I I, you know, and depends where you do it as well. Like in The US, it's obviously a lot more expensive. I have, like, a retreat in India where we do it very cheap, with a clinic there. So, you know, we could cover the entire body analysis with only, like, a few thousand, whereas in The States, it will be, like, 20,000. So, you know, it's hard to say, like, how much it would cost in that sense. But, yeah. Regular blood work, I would say it's gonna be at least a few thousand per year. But, yeah. Cool. Chezrat? You. Yeah. It sounds like SIM is a lot more thorough than me. I I'd say about $4,000 last year. And, of of those things that you you do track, what do you track most frequently? So tests that you pay for that are done frequently. And what is the frequency? Last year, I tracked my homocysteine, so it was a bit higher than I would like. And, I also did some things to lower it, like, took a trimethylglycine and did hyperbaric oxygen therapy, and it, you know, lowered it to the optimal range. And I did, like, maybe three, four tests within a few months, for that. It's not the one that I would like to test the most frequently. Most frequently, I would test just, you know, regular but for me, I I like to look at, you know, testosterone and sex hormones and lipid panel and blood sugar, like, I think those very basic ones are very, what I find, quite practical. And there's, yeah, like a few individual ones, like homocysteine or oxidized LDL or TNF alpha or something like that that sometimes is more curious. Is it? Yeah. I don't get too much into, let's say the more obscure biomarkers. I have test tested testosterone, like, eight times last year, so I was trying to see how different things would affect it. And I I if there was one that I had to say I tested the most, it'd probably be that one. Okay. Great. So both of you have done quite a lot of experimentation. You have, shared your protocols with the world in ways that I think have created a lot of, value for people. And some of these experiments could be risky or it could cause harm. And what I want was wondering about is, for each of you to name, an experiment that you did, a self experiment that caused harm, and, what whether, you know, if you could go back in time and tell yourself something about it, before you did it, what what would it be? Would you have done would you do it again? Would you have done again? So, yeah. Please. You wanna go first? Well, I did it like ten years ago or something. I did, or not ten, nine years ago, I did, polyphasic sleeping. So so that's like I slept four hours or no. I'd have to sleep three hours per night, then I wake up for a few hours, took a twenty minute nap, and did it like three times, so in total I slept like four hours in twenty four hour period. I did it for a hundred days, and, you know, I did it for just curiosity. I wasn't thinking of, hey, can I get away with like less sleep? Can I function the same way? You know, I I managed to maintain, you know, equal cognition, although I had to, like, consume caffeine to maintain it. But the biggest reason, yeah, like, I stopped was the it impeded, like, physical performance and, like, gym was much harder or, like, you plateau at the gym. And I think, yeah, like, long term is obviously not gonna be very good. So, you know, I would say doing very kind of extreme polyphasic sleeping or, like, depriving yourself from sleep is definitely not worth it. In the long term, you might, you know, gain a few hours for productivity, but, yeah, like, if you live, you know, shorter because of that reason, then, it's not worth it. Did that crush your mood? I don't know. I wasn't paying attention to my mood back then. But, I think, you know, you definitely are a bit more I mean, it's kind of interesting. You do, like, feel a bit lucid or something, like because if you it would be I think if anyone ever remembers being, you know, sleep deprived, then then it's, yeah, you feel tired, but you also feel, like, kind of funny or gonna lose it a little bit. So you're just feeling, like, semi drunk a little bit all the time. There's actually, I came across this one particular study finding that sleep deprivation could potentially be a way to treat depression. For some reason there, because I've, I've done a lot of all nighters and have definitely experienced that on more than one occasion. Like I'm almost giddy if I go past a certain length. It's kind of, kind of like in the Wolf of Wall Street, they say you have to get past the sleepiness of the Quaalude to get high. So with this, it's like you have to extend this, the sleep deprivation long enough. And then after all, I'm kinda really happy, like, to be totally honest. Yeah. It increases like BDNF a little bit. So it's like, you're like, wow. Yeah. But, yeah, long term you'll probably do more harm. Which, by the way, there there is possibly gonna be an observational study run at Vitalis Bay on, BDNF, which is a peptide, which which was just mentioned. So if somebody is using it and wants to participate in the observational study, or has some other interest in this, please reach out to me. Just a quick comment on this sleep, point. I know that when you do polyphasic sleep, there's the sense I I'd only done it for maybe, like, a week. I'm by no means as committed, in in that way. I didn't try. It felt like it was a continuous stream of consciousness, like there there was less of a reset. Did you find that to be the case for the hundred days that you were, like, in a continuous, like, one long day? Well, it definitely merges the days into more like some block. Like you because you take their sleep so frequently, it like it doesn't feel like night and day that much and you're awake in the middle of the night, etcetera. I did feel like sleep paralysis once as well as I was like in the bed. I was like, I can't wake up, I can't wake up. And I saw some sort of a ghost or something but, but yeah. Alright. Cool. Yeah. Joseph, experiment that, caused harm? And, what what would you do if you could go would you do it again? Would you go back and tell yourself something about it? Yeah. So the the five day fast plus marathon, that was easily the, I mean, it just messed everything up. There's no benefit. Like I guess my triglycerides and insulin were low, which is technically good, better to have, but my cortisol was double the top of the reference range. So I think the top of the reference range was 20. Mine was 40. And then I, so I guess what I would do, I might do it again. Cause I'm not super afraid of like temporary destruction of my physiology, because I feel like it'll bounce back sufficiently. One thing I would have done differently is not scheduling to meet my friends who are traveling from Texas, like two days afterward. So I was like trying to be a good host while I was like dying mentally inside and I was super anxious due to all these crazy changes. I feel like there was another one that there's yeah. Testosterone dropped dramatically, cortisol rose dramatically. I I feel like there's one other one that looked really bad and, I can't remember which one, but maybe I would train for the marathon more. I I really wasn't, like, properly trained for a marathon and I just kinda winged it because it was my birthday had just come up, and I thought I need to do something crazy because I'm 35. And that's what I did. So I might do it again. Cool. Yeah. Thank you. Quick backup to the question of costs. I know, some people, they look at tests. They also look at nutrition. You mentioned that you didn't count the nutrition and the cost. And that triggered a little light for me, and I was thinking, okay, you know, sometimes it feels like it's expensive to eat very healthfully or maximally, beneficially to optimize whatever the strategy is. Have you guys found that at all in terms of, like, cost of nutrition as you've gone through your experimentation that, there are certain strategies that may be positive, but they cost a lot more? Yeah. Well, in Estonia, it's much cheaper, the food, than, you know, in The States, for example. I do think that there are certain foods that are very hyped, but they don't have, like, that much, I guess, value, and they're very expensive. I mean, they might, you know so, like, you know, some examples would be like some sort of like sprouts or something. Right? Yes, they have they're a good source of like sulforaphane and, help with antioxidant defense, etcetera. But, you know, you have to consume quite a lot of them as well and, you know, per kilogram they're quite expensive. So, like, yeah, it's hard to say, like, if if it's worth it or not. Like, how much are you getting from just if if you buy this box of the sprouts and then it's much easier, actually, to grow them. Like, if you I mean, it's much cheaper to grow them yourself. So if you someone is interested in, like, sprouting or something like that, then they should, you know, do it themselves. And the same probably with fermented foods. You know, fermented foods and drinks can be quite expensive, but you can also make them at home for, you know, pretty much cheap, or free. So, yeah. Just like certain certain superfoods can be priced quite high. And the same can be applied to meat. Like, you know, how much meat do you need to eat to be healthy and get all the vitamins and minerals? Like, theoretically, you can get all the nutrition from, you know, a few 100 grams of meat already, so you don't need to eat two, three kilograms of meat every day, which can be more expensive. So you can cover all the b vitamins and other iron and all the other stuff from just, you know, a few 100 grams, And the the rest of the food can be, quote, cheaper food. Yeah. So in those it can go both ways. Like, you can pay a lot for a lot of expensive super foods, but you can also pay a lot for, you know, salmon or beef. Like, if you eat two kilograms of salmon a day, that can be quite expensive. Totally. Joseph and and and and maybe if you if both of you guys could give a sense like is the factor like two x the price or like three x the price in terms of what what it what it cost to what in your mind eat optimally versus eat like, you know, a person who's not aware of this stuff. You mean as opposed to say standard American diet or someone who's just kinda winging it? Somebody who wants to eat healthfully but is, let's say, a poor college student. You know what I mean? Like, they wanna eat healthfully, but they look at that price of whatever meat. And and maybe, by the way, this is also a good segue into another topic. So maybe when you give your answer, Joseph, you could also, have a comment on that about how do you know what's good. Right? We look at different sources of information. I know you're gonna give a whole talk about this in in some vector, but, like, organic this, organic that, the prices can go up like two, three x. And it's hard to know what's what, these fermented foods, etcetera, boutique, you know, companies that are producing this. So anyway, any any thoughts on on this entire topic? Yeah. That's really tricky because there's just so much to touch upon. I my diet changes quite a bit. I don't I'm not really like the one maybe people see my videos about the ketogenic diet or about the carnivore diet or about this or that diet and they might think, oh, he's like the carnivore diet guy. But, my diet changes quite a bit over the year, and I would say the through line is that I am getting a significant amount of animal protein, usually beef and then eggs. And then if I'm eating a lot of carbs, it's usually probably gonna be sweet potatoes. Well, like, Japanese sweet potatoes. And I feel like as a base, that's relatively cheap, and and doesn't I wouldn't say it makes my pattern of eating more expensive than the average person. Maybe it's even cheaper since I heat up home, a fair bit when I can. I guess it comes down to like how high quality meat you want to do. At some point I stopped worrying about grass fed. So, the grain fed stuff tastes better anyways. And most of it seems like the, one of the bigger benefits of grass fed is that you get, for example, higher concentrations of certain fat soluble vitamins in the fat. So, yeah. Price wise, I guess it it depends on, like, how many obscure supplements and obscure superfoods you wanna take, like, Sim was hinting at. So I don't do too many supplements, and I try and keep it pretty simple and just go with, like, fish, beef, maybe some potatoes, and then eggs, and, you know, like seaweed here and there, some Japanese staples, and it's, like, pretty cheap. I I wouldn't say it's necessarily more expensive than the average person in at least in Japan. Yeah. And like, you know, there's a certain amount of nutrients and vitamins and minerals your body needs and overdosing on them by eating a ton of these very nutritious foods doesn't give you more benefits. So like I said, you only need like a few 100 grams of meat, even like 100, 200 grams and you'll pretty much cover all your B vitamins and iron for the day. And you know, you need certain amounts of fiber optimally so you can cover them with, you know, broccoli, beans, or carrots, whatever, like those kind of things, and, healthy fats. So you can take omega three supplement, like, that will be, like, very easy to cover your daily omega threes. You don't even need to eat fish, theoretically speaking. And, you know, there's stuff that can come from rice, sweet potatoes, fruits, or something like that. So there's a certain foods that are like filler foods to get your calories, like rice and sweet potatoes and, other things. And there's a certain nutritious foods which would make up, like, a minority. And you don't need, like, extra more if you're on a budget. Yeah. Like the the liver king approach of, like, overdosing on copper with liver doesn't really make sense. It's not necessary. Yeah. So, going from that to, dig on, dig a little bit deeper on, how to trust, what to trust. Do you have any rules of thumb that are worth noting for other people? You know, they're they're going to buy food or, you know, try to make decisions about what to consume. What's what's your rule of thumb, or how do you make decisions, and how how deeply do you research stuff? As a rule of thumb, I guess it depends on where the person is in terms of their knowledge of nutrition. So I might if I'm talking to someone and then they want some nutritional advice, then I would try and feel out where they are in terms of, you know, do they know are they interested in nutrition at all before this point? So do they have any sort of frame of reference? But a kind of rule of thumb that I think is easy to understand but also make use of is, you know, I got into this stuff through the paleolithic diet, and I thought I really like the concept of it's just, okay, go back twenty thousand years, what did we have available? You know, paleolithic humans were really robust actually. Their their bone densities were higher, they appeared to be more fertile, and they were just, like, physically very robust. They had better skull structure. They have better dental arches, so they would have less sleep apnea and snoring and all these kind of things. So then you look at what were they eating, and it was just whatever was available, which is, probably meat and tubers, maybe some honey and, fish and then some berries, fruits, things like that. So it's kinda if if you just need a rule of thumb of, okay, how can I judge whether this is healthy or not? And you don't wanna get too much into the weeds and the details and all the studies, then I think it's a fair enough rule of thumb. And I think that's why the the paleo diet sort of took off when it did because it it was just a really simple concept. Yeah. Like, a easy rule of thumb is to if it's packaged, like, and it's processed, then it's, less likely to be healthy. Although, you know, some processed foods can be healthy as well. But if, yeah, if it doesn't have a package, like, it's a whole food meat, fish, potatoes, rice, fruits and stuff, then, you know, it's it's harder to go wrong with that. And, you know, other things like organic versus non organic, so like the issue with organic is that it there's also organic pesticides and stuff like that. So you're not really getting quote unquote chemical free food even with organic food. It just costs more. And, you know, there's ways certain foods, yeah, are better to be consumed organic, so the ones that you eat the flesh with or the skin with, like strawberries and grapes and those kind of things. The others, like tubers, underground, they're kinda safer to be consumed than non organic. But anyway, you would wanna still wash the things that you eat and, you know, soak them ideally. Like you can technically remove a lot of, you know, dirt and bacteria and, so You do that with everything you eat? I mean, with berries and apples, for example, not if I'm traveling. I don't have, like, baking soda or apple cider vinegar when I'm traveling, but but, at home, like, if I buy some strawberries, you know, you can soak them in there for a little bit. And, at least that helps with a lot of the dirt and stuff as well. Cool. Yeah. Two more questions, and then we'll wrap, because we have another, more stuff coming on. One question is about protein. So, there are different perspectives on this, a lot of research. One of the trade offs seems to be from the short to the long term, that if you consume more protein in the short term, and maybe this actually also kind of coincides with paleolithic, You can become more robust. You can build more muscle, etcetera. But there are some who argue that, if you or some evidence that if you consume a lot of protein, and some people are recommending, you know, quite high doses, like two gram per kilo or something like that, that that would really actually have a deleterious effect, longevity wise, because it creates, more burden, on your body, metabolically and and, and, you know, you're ramping up mTOR and other things like that. Do you guys have an opinion about this? I'd yeah. I'd be curious to hear, where SIM's coming from because my perspective is basically yeah. There's some theoretical reasons why you should restrict protein to live longer, mainly through the mTOR signaling like you're talking about. But all these there's are many other things that are either have been found to be neutral for longevity or positive for longevity that actually upregulate mTOR. Like exercise, most of the the benefits you're getting from exercise is through the mTOR pathway, through stimulating the mTOR pathway. And then another one, I think if you eat carbohydrates, that that also stimulates mTOR. So, you know, if you're not supposed to eat protein, you're not supposed to eat carbohydrate, like, are you just gonna eat, like, beef towel all the time or, avocado oil or something like that? The other thing is, so sarcopenia is actually a really big issue for the aging person. And as you get older, you hold on it's harder to hold on to muscle, so you're gonna need more instances of muscle protein synthesis. And there's two ways to stimulate muscle protein synthesis is through protein and exercise. And, you know, it gets harder to exercise while you're when you get older too, but you need to maintain your muscle not just for metabolic health but for your you know, you have better ability to navigate yourself and you can walk more and get more of the benefits from from low level activity, but you, also need to not fall. So you need some muscle mass to get better coordination. You're not gonna get a hip fracture or something like that. So I yeah. I I just don't if anything, I might even argue that these higher doses of protein might actually be appropriate for the elderly because, for example, it becomes harder for them to digest protein as they age. Their digestive processes that are liberating the protein and making it available are less efficient. And so you might actually need more bioavailable protein, which would be animal protein. So, yeah, for those reasons, you know, due to the sarcopenia and how protein helps and muscle mass muscle mass helps with metabolic health and longevity, I don't think it's I wouldn't worry about protein as reducing longevity. Same. Yeah. Like, it's very there's a lot of pros and cons to that. One obvious thing is, yeah, like, if you eat a very low protein diet, you'll potentially have low muscle mass and bone density, which we know predicts mortality in elderly people. And there is, like, with protein intake, there is a certain switch, or like a shift, around the age of, like, 65 that they see that a low protein diet actually increases mortality risk in those people older than 65, probably because of the sarcopenia and frailty risk. Whereas, yeah, if you're younger, you can get away with lower protein, Whether or not it's optimal, you know, that's a different question because you, you know, that's the best time to build the muscle and the bone density is when you're kind of younger before it's harder later in life. So, with protein, there's, you know, certain biomarkers I would much rather look at rather than think about the protein itself, you know, things like IGF-one. So it's one of the theoretical reasons why protein shortens lifespan, so increases IGF-one, and that increases risk of cancer and heart disease. But with IGF-one, it's a U shaped curve. Low IGF-one levels are also associated with increased mortality, as is high levels. So if so something like 115 to 130, I think is the sweet spot. So if it's below that, then your risk of sarcopenia and frailty is higher. If it's over three hundred or something, then it's, you know, higher risk of cancer. But, yeah, it's not only protein that because I eat I don't eat, like, crazy high protein diet, but I eat more than is, like, average, I would say. But my IGF-one levels are still in the normal range. It's like a 100 in this kind of sweet spot. And I also eat carbs. So it's not only like what you eat, but, you know, how you eat and what else do you do. Because diabetes and high blood sugar levels, they also stimulate mTOR, so this chronic mTOR activation in diabetes, and IGF-one as well. So you're actually not only because of what you eat or, like, it's not the protein or the carbs necessary, it's just that you have diabetes, for example. But my yeah. It's a you have to measure things, to see how particular food affects your risk. Like carbohydrates, I eat like 300 grams of carbs a day. I have very normal and low blood sugar levels, whereas someone who has diabetes, if they eat 300 grams, they might, you know, have persistent hyperglycemia and, insulin resistance. So it depends a lot on the person who is eating the food when it comes to the macros. Awesome. Awesome answers. Alright. Last question as we wrap up. So, neurotropics and, cognitive performance. I know a lot of people here are basically doing work with their minds primarily. That's, how they succeed in life and so forth, maybe in the Bay Area as much or more than anywhere else in the world. What is, what are one or two of your, preferred neuroenhancing protocols or behaviors, that may not be obvious, you know? We all know about caffeine, but, or maybe there's some way to consume caffeine that we don't know about. But I'll hand it to you guys. Yeah. I mean, the second one after caffeine is probably nicotine. So, like, nicotine gum or patches, they're, like, in small doses. They can have some, nootropic effects. The problem with nicotine is that chronic use, can cause vasoconstriction, so like, tightening of the blood vessels. I think it's like something like eight milligrams a day. So that can increase risk of heart disease or hypertension. Like, I wouldn't use nicotine in large doses all the time, but the small doses, like one milligram, two milligrams, pretty is pretty good. Yeah. So in terms of what to combine with caffeine, l theanine seems to work pretty well. It's, it's supposed to reduce the jitters of coffee. And, there's studies finding that people have, like, better focus with caffeine plus l theanine. I do a couple different things. So I'm balancing, like, caffeine and nicotine and salt and not eating. So basically if you're not eating and you're having caffeine and nicotine, then you're gonna be more anxious. And so then to kind of reduce that, I'll add some salt. So salt has this weird effect that I want to dive more into the mechanism to see exactly why this works. But, it seems to be that when your cortisol is higher, you release more salt, you excrete more salt. So if you replace it, you're gonna feel a little better. So, actually, before my talk, I was a little nervous, so I had some I just put some salt in water, drink that, and I actually felt way better. And so I came up and started talking, but, Yeah. So, you know, you're, you're doing too much stimulation, but then if you get too anxious, you can't really work appropriately or creatively enough. And actually, yeah, not eating anything is the best for me to stay alert specifically. I'll like avoid eating a high carbohydrate meal if I have a lot of work in a a particular day. But then then if if you're not eating anything, then you're more, like, susceptible to the stimulants, and you'll get more jittery and more anxious, and then I'll throw in some salt. So it's kind of a balancing act. Sometimes I'll just eat some carbs if I feel like the, caffeine or nicotine is too much because that also blunts some of the effect of the caffeine and nicotine if I've, like, overshot with it. So that those different things is what I go for. But the biggest one, like, in terms of actually moving the needle, even though maybe I don't, because, like, you feel awesome when you drink caffeine. It's like you're working, but you also feel like, oh, I'm so productive and I feel great, and you're really confident about it. But you might not necessarily actually be more productive, you just feel like it. With fasting, I feel objectively like I'm just getting more done. So that's me. Yeah. With nootropics, it's differences in people's neurotransmitter profiles. So, yeah, like, some people get very anxious from smaller amounts of caffeine. They metabolize it slower, and they're more sensitive to it. And, others are more, like, I guess, more duller or more GABAergic and, so they need more stimulation. So these are very individual. Like, some people love caffeine, they work great with it. Others feel worse with it. The same with nicotine and, you know, other other like nootropic agents as well. So there's no universal nootropic profile. It's a protocol that's like everyone has has to find what works for them. But, one cool ingredient is paraxanthine, which supposedly gives you like the same effects as caffeine, but it doesn't stimulate you that much. I think there's, like, one drink that has it. It's it's quite new. It's been maybe for one one or two years out. Cool. Well, I'll follow-up on that and I reckon so. Because I haven't heard about it. I don't know. How many people have heard of that? Raise your hand. Few? Okay. Few, if none. And one, one follow-up on this for me. Last follow-up. What's your take on Modafinil? I've never used it, so I hear you. For when, when I had let other aspects of my health, not so dialed in, it was kind of magical. It was like, I would just take it and I didn't really feel like I was overstimulated and say with something like too much caffeine or Adderall or something like that with those, you just, I just felt bad. Modafinil, I was like, I would take it, and then I would get all this work done without even thinking about it. Like, it would just it would just magically happen, and then I would look back and be like, woah. So productive. But then exactly as Sim is saying about the different, you know, your, like, neurotransmitter profiles, my friend took it, and he's like, I just got a headache, and I had to take a nap. I hate that stuff. And he tried it, like, three times, and then it just was terrible each time. But for me, it was kinda magical. Now it feels actually a little overstimulating. Oh, interesting. Alright. Well, thanks a lot, guys. This was amazing. And, they're gonna be here, so chat with them and, let's let's go. Thank you. Alright. Give it up. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.