I've been getting dozens of requests to make a video about fatty fifteen. Fatty fifteen is a new supplement that contains c fifteen or pentadecanoic acid, which is a fatty acid found in dairy fat like cheese and milk. C fifteen is marketed as a critical nutrient needed for good health and longevity because it will strengthen cell membranes and increase mitochondrial function. The price point, $50 a month. That's not cheap and actually quite expensive. So the effects of the supplement better be worth it for this price point. I'm going to look at the research behind c fifteen and see if it's actually what it's claimed to be. Like I said, you naturally get c fifteen from dairy fats and whole fat dairy like whole milk, cheese, cottage cheese, yogurt, kefir, etcetera. There are observational studies showing that elevated plasma c 15 levels are associated with a lower risk of cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and some cancers. This 2021 meta analysis of 18 observational studies saw that higher c 15 levels were associated with a lower risk of cardiovascular disease. Now these are all very fascinating findings that people with higher c 15 levels have less heart disease and diabetes. Because humans can't make much c 15 endogenously, the main reason for elevated c 15 levels could be because of consuming dairy fat. However, there are also other possibilities. For example, otherwise, healthy people tend to have lower inflammation status, and we know that high inflammation tends to oxidize certain fatty acids in the bloodstream. It might be kind of a survivorship bias that the individuals with the highest c 15 levels have the lowest inflammation and the best metabolic health, which is the real reason why they see a lower risk of heart disease. Yes. They would still have to eat dairy, but the individuals who eat a lot of dairy and have low c fifteen levels might also have high inflammation that lowers their c 15 levels. Unfortunately, we don't have that kind of research to look at it. That's why we would also have to look at the clinical trials that look at the effects of c fifteen on metabolic health in isolation and in a controlled environment. Fortunately, there are at least two clinical trials on c fifteen. The first one is done by the company selling fatty fifteen and it was published in 2024. They took overweight individuals and saw that taking two hundred milligrams a day of c fifteen for twelve weeks rose plasma c 15 levels significantly compared to placebo. So yes, taking c fifteen as a supplement raises plasma c 15 levels. Those whose plasma c fifteen reached over five micrograms per milliliter saw a statistically significant decrease in liver enzymes ALT minus 29 units per liter, AST minus six, and GGT minus 11 units per liter. Their hemoglobin also increased by 0.6 grams per deciliter. However, only 50% of the people out of twenty reached plasma c fifteen over five micrograms per milliliter, and those who didn't reach that threshold didn't see any improvements. That's fifty percent of the people getting the supplement not getting any benefits. The reason why half of the participants didn't reach the required threshold was thought to be that they weren't taking the supplement consistently, but it might be some other reason for it as well. So based on this study, c 15 levels only rise in certain people after taking a supplement, not everyone. And two, to get the benefits from c fifteen supplementation, you need to reach plasma c fifteen levels of over five micrograms per deciliter. And if you don't reach that threshold, you're not seeing any benefits. Furthermore, the participants saw no difference in their cholesterol, glucose, and inflammation. That's probably because their levels were within normal range to begin with, Whereas that wasn't the case with their liver enzymes. These o rate people already had elevated liver enzymes in the beginning. So c fifteen supplementation might work only in improving markers that are not optimal and it might work only in some people and not others. Another 2024 randomized controlled trial saw that c fifteen supplementation together with a Mediterranean style diet resulted in a significantly greater decrease in LDL cholesterol compared to just a diet protocol without c fifteen. However, the addition of c fifteen to the diet didn't produce additional benefits on lowering total cholesterol, triglycerides, liver enzymes, insulin and HOMA IR. The participants had these markers higher than normal which could explain the effects. But the improvements in them were already achievable with the Mediterranean style diet with c fifteen providing no additional benefits. The diet prescribed in this trial did include some dairy but they recommended low fat dairy and they recommended restricting other animal fats. So they weren't getting a lot of c fifteen from their dietary sources. And based on this finding, it's not clear whether c fifteen supplementation would provide any additional benefits that you wouldn't get from an otherwise healthy diet, even if that healthy diet is low in dairy fats and other animal fats. And that's pretty much it, there's only two clinical trials that I could find on C15 supplementation. So let me give you a recap of the findings. Number one, C15 supplementation raises plasma C15 levels and higher C15 levels are associated with a lower risk of heart disease and diabetes. However, because these are observational studies, we don't know if supplemental c fifteen has the same effects. Number two, c fifteen supplementation doesn't raise plasma c 15 levels in everyone. And to get benefits, you need to reach a plasma c fifteen level of over five micrograms per milliliter. Number three, c fifteen supplementation has no significant effect on cholesterol, blood sugar, insulin, or other markers of metabolic health compared to placebo or a standard Mediterranean diet. It might have additional effects on LDL cholesterol compared to diet alone. And number four, c fifteen supplementation lowers liver enzymes only if they're high to begin with and only in those people who reach a plasma c fifteen of over five micrograms per milliliter. So overall, the evidence for c fifteen supplementation is very limited and weak. Most of the claims that c fifteen is an essential nutrient and is very important for health and longevity is done by the company that sells fatty fifteen. So you have to take it with a massive grain of salt. The clinical evidence for c fifteen is very limited, and it doesn't appear to provide any additional benefits that you wouldn't get from an otherwise healthy diet such as a healthy Mediterranean diet even if that diet is low in dairy fats. Yes. The observational data is interesting that people who have higher plasma c 15 levels, they have less heart disease. That's very interesting indeed, but it's not clear whether this is because of consuming more c fifteen from diet or supplements or it might be because of something else such as lower information. We just don't have enough clinical data to make any conclusive claims about c fifteen. And for a monthly price tag of $50 I just think that it's not worth it to spend that much money on a speculative supplement. However, there are at least 15 supplements that do have a lot of evidence for longevity. Check out my video about this next.