I think every one of us has heard a saying that life is equal to time. And it basically is in a literal sense because how long you're alive just reflects to how much time have you spent alive, and how much time are you alive. And many people say that, you know, time is equal to money, and therefore life is equal to money. Of course, money is very important, but money isn't going to extend your lifespan directly. Of course, you can hire good doctors, but what you need is longevity intelligence. And this is a concept that I've coined, and you might have heard about emotional intelligence, social intelligence, those kind of things. But when we're talking about longevity, then I think longevity intelligence is a good concept to use. So what does it consist of? It basically consists of many factors that affect your longevity and health. They are your genetics, your lifestyle, your disease risks, your biological age, your biomarkers, and also what I call the longevity horizon, which refers to what happens to your health in decades. And in my presentation, I'm going to go through these components and, explain you how can you increase your longevity intelligence. Before that, a quick example of my grandfather, who unfortunately died at a young age of 36, to colorectal cancer. And, you know, of course, life is unexpected. There are many things that contribute to a person's death, but a great deal of that was because of his lower level of longevity intelligence. Now, it wasn't his fault. He lived in the Soviet occupied Estonia at the time, so no one really knew about how do you prevent cancer or how do you prevent other chronic diseases. But colon cancer is one of those, types of cancer that you can pretty much treat completely if you detect it early enough. And the gold standard diagnostic tool for detecting colon cancer is the colonoscopy, and if you detect the cancer early enough, then, yeah, you can cure it completely. Unfortunately, you know, he never did a colonoscopy. He never did a blood test. He never did a DNA test, and, he also followed some unhealthier lifestyle habits such as smoking and alcohol, which, ultimately led to his death. So let's start with some of the lifestyle and disease related risk factors to your longevity. The World Health Organization has outlined the top 10 causes of death worldwide, and they are ischemic heart disease, stroke, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, lower respiratory infections, neonatal conditions, different cancers, Alzheimer's and neurodegeneration, diarrheal diseases, diabetes, and kidney disease. So most people in the Western and industrial societies will die from some of these non communicable diseases, such as heart disease, cancer, neurodegeneration, and diabetes, and these are predominantly lifestyle related diseases. And as people who want to live a long time, our main goal is to pretty much focus on preventing these diseases because they're going to give the biggest bang for your buck in terms of extending your actual lifespan. And these diseases also follow a certain timeline. For example, before the age of 50, your risk of heart disease and cancer and Alzheimer's is very low, but after the age of 50 and especially after the age of 60, your risk of heart disease and cancer starts to increase exponentially. Now, Alzheimer's and other forms of neurodegeneration start to increase slightly later, so late seventies and early eighties, and heart disease and cancer are still like the first of the main killers for most people, and it's almost like the bottleneck as well because you can't reach the age of 100 if you get a heart attack and die at the age of 60. So, therefore, if you want to reach the age of 70, you need to make sure you don't get a heart attack in your sixties, and if you want to reach the age of 90, you need to make sure that you don't get some form of Alzheimer's or neurodegeneration in your eighties. So postponing these diseases is the key. The American Heart Association has outlined some of these eight life essential components or factors that reduce the risk of heart disease, and they are, number one, get healthy sleep, number two, manage weight, control cholesterol, manage blood sugar, manage blood pressure, eat healthy, be more active, and quit tobacco. So these are the easiest, most modifiable lifestyle risk factors as well that will reduce the risk of heart disease. At the same time, they also acknowledge the fact that age and aging is the biggest risk factor for heart disease. The older you get, the higher your risk of any form of chronic disease becomes. So therefore, you need to also look at some of the hallmarks of aging, which I'm not going to go into the details in this presentation, but essentially slowing down the speed of your biological aging will also reduce the risk of all these chronic diseases, especially heart disease. Now what's good for your heart is also good for your brain. So if you reduce the risk of heart disease, then you're also reducing the risk of neurodegeneration and Alzheimer's. Now there is one key concept that specifically refers to the brain and neurodegeneration and its, brain or cognitive reserve. And it essentially describes your brain's resilience. It's resilience against different kinds of stressors and aging, and people who have a higher cognitive reserve, they also experience less symptoms of neurodegeneration, and they might even delay it. Whereas people who have low reserve, their decline in neurodegeneration and Alzheimer's is also much faster. Now the cognitive reserve doesn't reflect to your intelligence. It doesn't mean how smart you are. It mostly refers to just using your brain in some shape or form. And use your using your brain can involve reading, learning new languages, solving puzzles. So if you have a very cognitively demanding occupation, you work at a job for decades that requires using your brain, then you have a higher cognitive reserve as well, and therefore, you have a lower risk of, let's say, accelerating the development of neurodegeneration. And even socializing is also very beneficial for increasing your cognitive reserves or social skills. The centenarians, people who live to the age of 100, they get the same diseases as everyone else. They just get these diseases a few decades later. And, this is also a clue to how the average person can extend their lifespan. You delay heart disease, you delay neurodegeneration with a proper lifestyle, and also monitoring your health status over the course of your entire life. But after the age of 75, there's an additional risk factor that can cut your life short, and that is frailty. So people after the age of 75 have a significantly higher risk of dying to falls. So they fall, they break a hip, and they die after that. And that is because of frailty. Low muscle mass, low strength, just aging and frailty. But before that before the age of 75, your risk of dying to falls is pretty low, but your risk of dying to other accidents like traffic accidents or overdoses is much higher. So if you're younger than 75, then, you need to be more careful with some of these other accidents. But after the age of 75, the risk of dying to falls becomes one of the biggest, like, preventable things you can focus on. So now, let's talk about the longevity horizon. So this refers to the idea of what happens to your health and your functional outcomes in decades. For example, every one of us follows a different trajectory with our health and health span, so the average person might start declining quite rapidly already in their forties or thirties, whereas the healthier individuals, they delay these comorbidities and they maintain better health. So this is the goal of extending your longevity horizon. You slow down the speed of biological aging, and therefore you're extending your health span as well. So a few examples of this muscle mass declined with age already starting in your thirties, and there's a huge range between individuals who have higher muscle mass and individuals who have lower muscle mass, and more importantly, how do you maintain it? Because it doesn't matter how much muscle mass you have in your youth. It matters more, okay, how do you slow down the decline? And the most important thing for that is just lifelong exercise. It doesn't matter if you're an athlete in your twenties, you need to stay physically active pretty much the entire lifetime. The e automatics is another marker that follows a similar trend starting to decline already after the age of 18. So, slowing down this decline will also have just benefits to your longevity, and a higher VO2 max is one of the biggest predictors of, longevity. Visceral fat starts to increase linearly in both men and women already in your twenties. So visceral fat is this fat around the organs and, with age, people tend to store or start to accumulate more visceral fat. Blood sugar levels also increase with age. In your twenties, they're relatively low, but in your eighties, they start to reach the pre diabetic levels. So the goal with this is to keep our blood sugar levels, keep our muscle mass, keep our VO2max and other markers in the level of someone who is in their twenties. So we might be chronologically 50 years old, but if our VO2 max is that of a 20 year old or if our blood sugar levels are that of a 20 year old, then we are with a lower biological age. And that is, in my opinion, one of the most convenient and most clinically relevant ways to assess your biological age as well, to look at your biomarkers. Because some of the biomarkers get worse with age, and if you keep them in the more youthful range, then you are also slowing down the biological age and extending your health span and reducing the risk of diabetes and heart disease, for example. Next up, we'll cover some genetic risk factors. The biggest genetic risk factor for Alzheimer's is APOE gene. For example, people with the APOE4 allele have the highest risk of neurodegeneration and Alzheimer's. E three has an intermediate risk, and E two is the lowest risk. Interestingly, people who have the E two allele also have a lower risk of mortality in general, so they have a lower risk of any disease, whereas people with the E four allele have a higher risk. And the amount of people who make up the E two allele is also very small, so only about zero point five percent of the population has two E2 alleles. So these are the genetically lucky ones. They have the lowest risk of, neurodegeneration and they are expected to also have greater longevity because of genetics. And people who have one copy of E2 have about they make up about eleven percent of the population. People who have two copies of E3 make up sixty one percent of the population, which is where I'm at as well. So these are the kind of average genetics. Then E3 and E4, twenty five percent of people, and E4, E4, the highest risk of neurodegeneration, about two to three percent of people belong in this category. Now you can't control your genetics. You can't change your APOE gene, but knowing it can help you to make more informed decisions with your lifestyle. So you see, you have this high risk variant in your genes, so you can make better decisions with your other lifestyle habits, and you can be more aggressive with some other risk factors for neurodegeneration, such as diabetes and inflammation, for example. Heart disease, lipoprotein A, LPA, is also a big genetic risk factor for heart disease. You can change it. You can modify it slightly with your lifestyle, but not a lot. And the higher your LPA levels, the higher the risk of heart disease is. Now the range can be huge. Some people can have an LPA level of three milligrams, which is the lowest risk. Some people can have up to 150, which is much higher risk. So you can't control it that much, but knowing it again can make can help you to make better decisions with your other risk factors. And this, you can do it with a blood test. You just do it once in your life. Okay. Where is my genetic predisposition for LPA? You don't need to do it, like, you know, several times. And the same with the APOE gene. Cholesterol is a controversial topic, but people who have severe familial hypercholesterolemia, which is a genetic condition where the body produces more cholesterol or they're less able to clear it from their blood, these people have a significantly higher risk of heart disease as well because their bodies are exposed to higher amounts of cholesterol for decades, and they get heart disease much faster, and they generally have a higher risk of mortality as well. Whereas people who have genetically lower levels of LDL cholesterol, these individuals have a much lower risk of heart disease as well because their body is exposed to lower levels of cholesterol for decades. So as you can see from the graph, most people are somewhere in the middle. They have either slightly elevated cholesterol because of genetics or slightly lower cholesterol because of lifestyle or genetics, and, the lower the cholesterol over decades, then typically in the general population you find that the risk of heart disease is lower. So here's an overview of some of the genetic risk factors. The main ones so I mentioned APOE, E4 for neurodegeneration, LPA for heart disease, MTHFR, a methylation gene also linked to heart disease, hypercholesterolemia, heart disease, hemochromatosis, so that refers to iron metabolism. Some people have genetically higher iron levels, so these individuals also have a higher risk of heart disease and liver disease. FTO is an obesity gene. And if you have people in your close family who have died to the same chronic disease, so everyone in your family has gotten heart disease or diabetes, then it kind of goes to show that you might have a genetically higher risk of those diseases as well. So it's just good to know your family history of different chronic conditions. And if some of your relatives got diagnosed early in life, so before the age of 55 with Alzheimer's or heart disease, then that could also indicate some genetic risk. Let's move on with biomarkers. So one key thing to understand with biomarkers is that there's the reference range and there's the optimal range. The reference ranges used in your lab tests, usually they're derived from where ninety five percent of the population falls into. But the problem is that ninety five percent of the population isn't that healthy, so we don't want to necessarily make our decisions and conclusions based on that. So what we want to do is look at what's the optimal range for the lowest risk of a particular chronic disease or the lowest risk of mortality. And that's what's our goal to be with our blood work. So with glucose, fasting blood sugar, it's pretty linear. Everything above one hundred milligrams per deciliter starts to increase the risk of heart disease and all cause mortality, and the optimal range for the lowest risk is somewhere between eighty to ninety four milligrams per deciliter for blood sugar levels. And prediabetes is already one hundred and fifteen milligrams per deciliter, but anything above a 100 already increases the risk. Triglycerides, this is an excellent example of the reference range being misleading. So the reference range, the normal range for triglycerides, is anything below 150, but everything above 100 already increases the risk, and even fifty milligrams, everything above fifty milligrams already increases the risk of heart disease with triglycerides. So the normal reference range of one hundred and fifty milligrams is misleading because it already increases your risk of heart disease quite a lot compared to having your triglycerides in the fifties and below that. CRP inflammation, another example of that. So the normal reference range for CRP is one point five milligrams per liter, but anything above zero point five already increases the risk of heart disease and mortality. So CRP inflammation levels, the lower it is, the better for mortality and longevity. Blood pressure as well, pretty linearly, the higher the blood pressure, the higher the risk of heart disease and mortality, and, hypertension, elevated blood pressure is categorized with a systolic blood pressure over 120 and diastolic over 80. So we're gonna keep the blood pressure below one hundred and twenty and eighty. Cholesterol, this is interesting. In some of the studies, they find that low cholesterol is sometimes linked to higher risk of heart disease mortality, but this phenomenon is called reverse causation, which refers to the idea that sometimes the lower cholesterol levels being associated with increased risk are because people who have very low cholesterol levels have low cholesterol levels that low because of cancer or some other disease. Malnutrition is a very common reason for low cholesterol levels. So people who have low nutrient intake, they're frail, elderly people especially, they have a higher risk of mortality and their cholesterol also drops low. And the studies that control for these variables so this particular study on over 4,000,000 US veterans followed up for several decades, did control for these variables, so they controlled for diabetes, liver cancer, some 11 other comorbidities, and they found that if you consider those factors, then anything above one hundred and eighty milligrams for cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, sorry, total cholesterol is linked to higher risk of heart disease mortality. So anything below one hundred and eighty milligrams is going to be optimal. And if you look at the younger population, so 18 to 45 years of age, then it's actually one hundred and fifty milligrams per deciliter. So different age groups can skew some of the results as well. So if you're younger, then lower cholesterol appears to be better for reducing heart disease mortality at least. Body fat. So this is something that has a pretty interesting sex difference. Women don't appear to see any increased risk to mortality up until the point of thirty five percent body fat, which is more like severe obesity even. And anything below that is very stable. There's like almost no difference between having a body fat of 20% versus 29% or 32% for women. But for men, it's very linear. You need to have your body fat very low, below 15% as a man to have the lowest risk. And anything above 30% increases the risk pretty exponentially. So there's about eight times more women who are over the 100 years of age than men. So, like, there's eight women centenarians and one centenarian man, typically. And, you know, based on this graph, then that one centenarian man has a six pack because he needs to be very lean and healthy. Waist circumference refers to the visceral fat. It's a very useful tool to measure your visceral fat. So you measure your circumference around the belly button, and for both men and women, the lower the waist circumference, the lower the risk, and the higher it is, the risk increases linearly. For men, the lowest risk is eighty five centimeters waist circumference, and for women, sixty five centimeters. So, of course, the more of these blood tests and markers you measure, the higher your longevity intelligence is going to be, because if you have more information about your health, you can do the full body MRI, colonoscopy, CT scan, all these other 200 biomarkers, whatever, the higher your longevity intelligence is going to be. But it's also going to, of course, cost a lot, and you can still get, like, 80% of the knowledge from just a few key biomarkers. So I've just outlined a few of these key biomarkers that you want to, like, measure once a year at least. Okay. Are these markers elevated or are these something that I need to work on? Because all these diseases, heart disease, diabetes, and neurodegeneration, they're not going to happen in years. They're going to happen typically in decades. But if you maintain normal and even better, like optimal biomarkers for decades, then it's very low. You're reducing the risk of these diseases a lot just by following your blood work. So I've outlined some of the key components of the longevity intelligence. You need to understand your genetics. You need to understand your blood work, your biological age in the sense that trying to mimic lower chronological age with your blood work, lifestyle and disease risk factors and the longevity horizon, which means that, you know, everything gets worse with age. Your VO2 max goes down with age. Your visceral fat increases with age. You can only slow it down and potentially maintain more youthful levels with these biomarkers. So as a conclusion, what is your longevity IQ? Like, it's obviously not a perfect metric. We don't have any biomarker to measure your longevity IQ. But let's say, if you have no idea about what's healthy, you have no idea what is cholesterol, what is inflammation, what is ApoB, whatever, then your longevity IQ is pretty low, number one. Number two, you understand your health superficially. You know, okay, I have a little bit of extra body fat. I know my blood pressure is high or something like that. It's still, you know, better than nothing, but it's still a low level of longevity IQ, Number two. Number three, you've taken a blood test. You understand some of the basics, like don't smoke, don't drink too much alcohol, but you don't know how do you interpret your blood test results. So you don't know what is their optimal range. Number four, you know your genetic risk factors and you also know your risk factors for different kinds of chronic diseases. You know that your blood pressure is high. You know that heart disease runs in your family. You know you have a particular gene for neurodegeneration or something else like that. And lastly, the number five, what we want to aim for is understanding our biological age. Like, we know our different blood markers and how do they correlate with our peers. We know our fitness scores. We know our VO2 max. We know our, like, body composition stats and those kind of things. And we're also tracking these things regularly. This is where we want to be at. At least like level four and five is where you want to be at because then you're at least you have the information, what you need to do, and you're not getting surprised by a chronic disease, like my grandfather did, for example. And, that's it for my presentation. If you have any questions, then this is my email, and you can also preorder my new book, The Longevity Leap, at thelongevityleep.com. Thank you.