I took twelve milligrams of melatonin every night for a week. Typical melatonin doses range from zero point three to three milligrams. So twelve milligrams is quite a mega dose. The amount of melatonin your body would naturally make is around zero point three milligrams. Twelve milligrams is 40 times bigger than zero point three milligrams. Melatonin is not only a sleep hormone. It's also one of the most powerful antioxidants in the body. And there are some interesting clinical trials on melatonin supplementation at ten milligrams that I'm gonna share with you. Let's first talk about my sleep. The biggest thing I noticed was that I was feeling a lot more tired in the morning after having even slept for eight hours. My sleep score was still very good and I didn't experience any problems waking up or staying asleep. But, I did feel slightly groggy and tired after waking up when I took the twelve milligrams of melatonin. It just felt like I just wanted sleep another two to three hours. I never get that kind of a feeling when I'm taking smaller amounts of melatonin like zero point three up to one milligrams. Maybe that's because my body is already producing enough melatonin. You see, melatonin levels decline quite a lot as you get older. Before puberty, your body produces about 10 times more melatonin than when you're in your fifties or sixties. I'm 30 years old at the moment which means I'm producing more melatonin than a 70 year old. But compared to a teenager, I'm still producing about a third of what a 10 year old would. Maybe I'm feeling that kind of a grogginess from taking larger amounts of melatonin because my body is already producing that much melatonin. Whereas if I was 50 or 70 years old then I wouldn't notice that effect. If I was 70 years old then I would be probably taking around five to six milligrams of melatonin every night to compensate for the lack of melatonin your body makes naturally at that age. Fortunately, this kind of drowsiness, it went away after a few hours when I woke up. But immediately after waking up, I did feel groggy. Now let's talk about the research about taking melatonin at such large doses. There is actually quite a lot of studies around supplementing ten milligrams of melatonin not for sleep but for reducing inflammation and improving other cardiometabolic risk factors such as blood sugar and lipids. Two meta analysis from 2021 and 2024 on clinical trials saw that ten milligrams of melatonin per day reduced inflammatory biomarkers such as HSCRP, IL one, IL six and TNF. Melatonin also increases antioxidant activity such as Glutathione and superoxide dismutase. The reduction in inflammation like CRP and TNF alpha were in the range of ten to 20%. But for Glazlathion, the increase was up to thirty percent. Ten milligrams of melatonin per day has also been seen to improve blood sugar, blood pressure, endothelial function and blood lipids which are all risk factors for heart disease. For blood sugar, the average reduction was twenty nine milligrams per deciliter. For insulin, two point two micro international units per milliliter. For blood pressure, minus 4.3 and minus 2.8 for systolic and diastolic blood pressure. And for LDL cholesterol, around minus 10 milligrams per deciliter. These numbers aren't like minus 10 milligrams per deciliter. These numbers aren't life changing but are still quite significant. However, because I already have very good biomarkers, I'm not going to expect to see a lot of improvements from melatonin supplementation on those biomarkers. But if I had diabetes or high inflammation then I would. I did measure my LDL insulin and blood sugar around this time and they were slightly better. LDL cholesterol went from 70 milligrams to 53 milligrams. Fasting blood sugar went from 85 to 75 and fasting insulin from three to 2.9. However, there are some other changes I also made to my diet and lifestyle such as calorie restriction which perfectly explains those results. But regardless, it is shown that melatonin at a dose of ten milligrams per day for several weeks does lower inflammatory markers and also improves metabolic health markers. So I tried this twelve milligram of Melatonin for a week, I looked at some blood markers and I didn't see a point of continuing mostly because of the drowsiness and tiredness I felt in the mornings. I never have problems waking up in the morning and I never feel tired like that in the morning normally so it's just not worth it for me on my blood work and based on my sleep performance. I know a lot of people will say like hey, even twelve milligrams isn't a mega dose, like fifty milligrams is what's considered a mega dose. The truth is that twelve milligrams is already 40 times higher than what your body would make naturally. So yes, it is a mega dose. What's more Melatonin doses at seventy five milligrams haven't seem to have contraceptive effects which is something I don't want. The only time I see myself taking ten milligrams or more melatonin is when I'm gonna get sick or if I'm already sick. So that can help with some of the flu symptoms. There are a few key things I changed about my sleep that helped me to take my sleep score from 77 to a 100 that you can check out in this video next. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.