What is it exactly that people should be working on if they want to actually solve the problem of aging? Perhaps the best way to repair something that's that doesn't work, whether it's from, like, a disease or an injury or even aging, right, is to just swap out that that part. Nathan, welcome to the show. Hey. Yeah. Thanks for having me, Sim. Yeah. You're, one of those people I kinda knew I had to have on my podcast when I found your profile on, Twitter or X, and it was kind of very interesting thing that, you were involved with, which is, I guess, like, whole body replacement and actual, you know, how do we actually extend human lifespan beyond what is just, achievable with regular diet exercise and and supplements, etcetera. So I'm kind of a very curious to delve into, like, okay, how would it theoretically actually look like? Because, you know, a lot of people throw around the idea of, you know, we're in this age where humans are gonna live hundreds of years with the the advancements in AI and medicine, but no one actually is able to tell you, okay, how does it actually look like? Or how will we actually achieve it? So, I guess maybe we can discuss, bounce back some ideas, of how to, you know, what would longevity look like in the next few decades. So, yeah, I'm happy to have you on the show. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I guess, we can start with your own backstory because as I understand correctly from my research about your backstory that you fell out of a PhD in physics to pursue longevity. So, yeah, what made you decide that? Yeah. I mean, it's a bit of a long story, but, I guess it goes back to when I was doing my PhD. I was at, University of Toronto, doing a PhD in physics. It was in something not related to biology at all. It was, like, quantum optics, ultra cold atoms research. And, I got two years into my PhD, and I had this just sudden realization that, I was actually going to die. Right? Like, that this is no longer just, like, a theoretical concept that, you know, it's gonna happen to other people. But, no, it's actually going to happen to me and, and to everyone I love as well. Right? So and I thought that this was just horrible. Right? Like, that this is actually going to happen. Most people just put it out of their minds. Right? They don't they don't like to think about these things day to day. Right? But for me, it it just, like, it was just, like, a very, I guess, visceral, realization. And, and the worst part about it was just, like, nobody I didn't know anybody else who, like, thought it thought it this way either. It was just like, oh, yeah. You know? Everything is fine. Like, everybody's just pretending that it's fine. Whereas now that, you know, we're coming to this this age where, you know, technology is advancing, science is advancing, maybe we can do something about it. Right? But at the time, I didn't know anything about biology. I was just, like, in a physics program and, just really bummed out, I guess, depressed about have this idea that we all just have to die. Right? There's no choice. So, I ended up, dropping out of my PhD. I just, yeah, just couldn't understand, like, you know, this this, working on physics in in light of this, like, much bigger problem. Right? So the word of operations, in which you tackle, like, certain problems really matters. And for me, it made sense to try and do something about about aging. So, eventually, you know, fast forward, many years of just, like, stumbling around and and finding stuff and just, like, going down many different rabbit holes. I discovered, Aubrey de Grey on YouTube. He has, like, this famous TED Talk where he, you know, just lays out this this idea that we can actually try to solve aging with science and so forth and and develop therapies against aging. So, eventually, I ended up, deciding that I wanted to get involved in in some sort of way. Like, I I didn't have a background in biology, so I needed to, you know, take some online courses. And then, in about, when was this? And then in July 2020, so around the time of the pandemic, I decided, that I would start a newsletter, which was just basically, first and foremost, just a way for myself to learn about the space. Right? So just force myself to learn, write about it every week. That's kind of like so I always recommend, to people to if they wanna get involved in in the space to to learn and start, like, a newsletter or something or write about it. So, yeah, I started a newsletter about longevity and investing, kind of, like, combining two things that I thought were interesting and, like, a a unique angle. And, I wrote about it on, like, the substack for for every week for for several months, you know, just to teach myself about the space. And, eventually, it got kind of semi popular. Some people started picking it up and, retweeting it and and, promoting it, like Balaji Srinivasan, who eventually, he introduced me to Eric Thornburg, who at the time was, running the startup called OnDeck. And they were building different, communities in, different verticals for for for founders, basically, who were building stuff. And, they wanted to expand into this longevity space. So, yeah, I joined, the team there at at OnDeck, building the first, like, longevity biotech fellowship program for them. Gotcha. And, yeah, I was there for about a year and a half, and we did two cohorts of that program. And then, eventually, I I spun it out, as a a nonprofit called, Longevity Biotech Fellowship, LBF. So I teamed up with, Mark Hamillainen, who was doing these kind of, like, more in person intensive workshop worksheets. We call them basically longevity camps. Basically, try to get, more people, like smart, talented, you know, engineers, entrepreneurs, whatever, data scientists, AI researchers to actually, you know, make a career transition or or whatever, get involved basically in in this technical problem of trying to solve aging. So that was kind of my path, but, you know, in the I also did a bunch of other things, like, in in in tandem with that, which, you know, I I started a fund, with a couple other, founders. So it's HealthSpan Capital. It's a VC firm. We, we've been operational for, like, three years, made, like, investments in, 30 early stage, longevity biotech companies, startups. And, and then also getting more involved in not just, like, the technical and, like, the the VC side, but also the political side, which, you know, just highlighting this idea that, you know, this is an important problem, so we need to advocate for it politically. So, also cofounded, a nonprofit called, Vitalism Foundation, which is basically trying to put forward this idea that we need to do something, like, drastic. Right? We need to make this humanity's number one priority. What else could be more important than trying to save people from the thing that's basically killing, like, eighty percent, of people today, which is, you know, aging and age related diseases. So, yeah, so that's kind of my backstory. It's kind of long. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it is in a sense, like, the problem, if you solve that, then you have all the time in the world to solve other problems. You know? Yeah. Like, if you, if, you'll have more years of productive years in your life, you know, and we're not talking about your immortality. Like, let's say people have twenty, thirty, fifty extra years of productivity, then, you know, they'll just advance in other fields as well much, faster in that sense. But, yeah, you mentioned the longevity biotech fellowship. So that's one of those, like, projects that kind of, tries to outline, okay, what are the steps that we need to take to, you know, try to achieve some sort of longitude scale velocity or steps towards that. So there's also, like, a road map you had on your website. So maybe we can start with that road map so that people can, you know, get some, you know, actionable not actionable, but, you know, some, informative, steps. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. So, you know, when we were running this program, right, longevity biotech fellowship, we're trying to, you know, find really bright, you know, talented, ambitious people who wanted to work on solving this problem and specifically solving this problem. Like, one of the superpowers of our community and our our program is that we we screen and we filter and we interview very rigorously for people who share the same sort of, like, mission alignment. Because as you know, like, this word longevity probably, you know, it means so many different things to different people. And for us, we we you know, our our goal is to to try and solve aging. And, but the problem is, you know, once you find these people, right, and they they come to your program, you know, they don't want to die of aging. They wanna solve this problem. The the first question that they ask is always just like, okay. But what should I work on? Right? And, unfortunately, in our field, there hasn't been, like, a great, like, I guess, discussion or articulation of what is it exactly that people should be working on if they want to, you know, actually solve the problem of aging. And if you go to any sort of, like, longevity conference, even if it's like a longevity biotech conference or aging conference, you'll find that most of the program is just, like, all these different research areas. Right? Everybody's working on their own specific thing, but there's never, like, a big picture sort of, discussion about, like, what is what is the plan. Right? So you could imagine, we're very much at the situation when we first started where it's kind of like, you know, Elon Musk in in 2001. Right? It's just like he goes to the NASA website and he says, hey. Where's the plan to go to Mars? And he looks on the website and there's no plan. Right? And we're basically at that situation. Right? Like, you go to the NIA, so National Institutes of Aging, website. There's there's no I don't even think they they think of aging as a thing that that needs to be solved, that there needs to be a plan, let alone, like, actually try to articulate a plan. Yeah. And most, like, biotech companies, let's say, longevity even longevity biotech companies, they won't explicitly say what what they think is is the plan. Usually, these are, like, conversations that people have kind of, like, at the back of their mind or, like, you know, maybe it's casually, stated, but, it's never being put at the forefront. So for us, the longevity biotech, fellowship, you know, we created this roadmap, this technical roadmap to solve aging, to be basically our way of saying, okay. Given what we understand today, what are the plausible paths that one could potentially work on or develop that could get us to, indefinite lifespan extension essentially is what we're trying to find. And, you know, the the road map really has three three features, which is one, that we wanted to focus exclusively on, the technical paths to solve aging. So not things that are kind of like, interim solutions where they're just like, oh, yeah. Well, if I do this, like, you know, create a drug that extends lifespan, I don't know, like, 5% in in in humans or something like that. That would just wake up, you know, the entire world, and then they would put more resources into actually, you know, funding the thing that would extend lifespan indefinitely. We're not interested in in that. We wanna actually know what is the concrete, you know, technology that could get us there, you know, given our current understanding. And, and then the other thing we wanted to do is try to make it more, like, actionable. Right? So that we actually try to estimate, like, the amount of resources, you know, both time and, and money that it would require to actually, you know, put a decent effort into one of these, like, technology roadmaps. We're not saying that, you know, if you put in x amount of money, you would, you know, have success, but at least you could, interrogate it, enough to to be able to say, okay. This is we we have we're reasonably sure, like, we we give it a a decent try, and we'll get a result one way or the other. Okay. Yeah. And the other thing is just, yeah, trying to make it, concrete for for funders as well and for people who want to get involved so that they can see what projects are on, like, the the road map so that they they could join. So that's kind of the situation with the road map. And it has three sort of main, technology paths, which we can get into, I guess, in Yeah. Yeah. The first one is, like, replacement. So that's, like, a replacement of organs and tissues and also, like, brain replacement. So, yeah, maybe we can start with the simpler ones, like, you know, replacement of, you know, you know, we all we can already replace kidneys and, those kind of things. So, yeah, how would you, like, look like how would you imagine this will look like over the next few decades of, you know, replacement of heart or lungs or liver, etcetera? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So the yeah. So the first, branch on the road map, replacement actually, there's three. There's, like, replacement, there's biostasis, and bioengineering. So for replacement, yeah, the the basic principle there is, perhaps the best way to repair something that's that doesn't work because of whether whether it's from, like, a disease or an injury or even aging, right, is to just swap out that that part. Right? So this is this is pretty commonplace if you're trying to, like, prepare, like, an old car or something like that. Yeah. We don't get into, like they might need details. They try and repair everything at the molecular scale of, you know, a broken, I don't know, engine or, like, a carburetor or whatever. You just replace it. Right? Mhmm. So that's the basic idea. And, the question is, like, how do you actually come up with the replacement parts? Right? And there's many different ways that people are thinking about, to do this. And, so in in the case of, like, kidneys, right, people mostly get kidneys from from donors. So people who, you know, have have just have died, and they donate their organs. Mhmm. But the issue there is there's just not enough organs to go around. Right? Like, there's a severe shortage there. So, to to create more organs, right, potentially, what you could do is, there's kinda, like, maybe three or four different major ways to do this, but one is to try to do, like, three d bio printing. Right? So you're trying to, like, go from from the the bottom up. You're trying to do, print, like, kind of like a a scaffold. So like a, sort of a a structure that mimics, like, the extracellular matrix of this, you know, of this organ and, of the tissues in the organ. And then you try to populate it with, like, stem cells or, or cells derived from stem cells, right, to get all the right stem cell, all the right cell types and so forth. And, and this is extremely difficult. Like, I, I don't think we're even close to, to getting this done. Like, people have, printed, like three d bio printed very, very simple organs like a like a bladder or something, which is basically just like a bag. Right? Sure. And that's fine. But, it's just like a very difficult technical problem. It may be in the future, it would be possible. But from my vantage point, and this is just my opinion, it doesn't seem likely that we'll be able to three d print, like, a whole kidney or, like and and also the other the rest of the other organs. Like, you would also need Right. If you were thinking about, aging, like, if all your organs are aging, So you'd have to do, like, kidneys, you know, heart, you know, lungs, everything. It just seems very difficult. Like, unimaginably difficult to me. So that's okay. So that's interesting. People are working on that. There's other stuff that's really interesting, which is basically, instead of going from, like, the bottom up, maybe what you can do is leverage, biology itself. So, like, you know, through billions of years of development and, you know, evolution, you know, biology is very good at self assembling stuff. Right? Like, just creating, organs by themselves. So, there's been a lot of, interest in xenotransplantation. Do you know what this is? Yeah. Like, foreign transplantation then, like, foreign some foreign body? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So, so you can do something like cross species. So there's a couple of companies, eGenesis and, United Therapeutics with their, I think, Revivacore and so forth, where, I think just recently in the news, there was, yeah, there was a story, that became popular, where they where they basically did this transplant of, of a pig kidney that had been genetically modified, to remove certain, like, endoviruses and stuff like that that wouldn't be compatible with the human immune system. And, yeah, edit did, like, 10 gene edits in this, pig in this pig and took its kidney and transplanted it into a human. So so this is one way to try and tackle the problem and develop more, sources of organs and tissues and so forth, which is great, and it's really cool that people are working on that. But then the last thing is, okay, what if we could go further than that? Like, what could what what what could we do that's kind of like that but better? Like, extend it. And the better would be to do human. Right? To get human organs, and grow them. But the issue there is, you know, unlike, a pig where, you know, it it's might be ethical to, you know, to grow a pig and so forth, you can't grow, like, an entire human with, like, a a brain and so forth. That's a whole person. Like Like the matrix. Yeah. Exactly. You you couldn't do that. Right? Like, that's totally unethical. So what you actually wanna do is just, just grow, like, the organs, like the Just the organ. Most of the critical organs or maybe just like the body, whatever you wanna call it, without, consciousness, without a brain. And, and it may be possible to do this. So, so where should we begin? Okay. So let me walk you through this. From what material? Or Yeah. So so in 2018, something happened. Something really important happened. Like, one of the biggest breakthroughs in science that basically nobody talks about. Do you do you know what it is? No. Mhmm. Okay. So in 2018, I think this made, cover science, but basically, yeah, primates were cloned for the first time in 2018. Right? And, it was like a a pair of monkeys. I think it was a collaboration between, a group in China and, in The US. And, basically, you know, even though, you know, sheep had been cloned for a really long time, right, like, that that was back in, like, I think, the nineties even, or early two thousands. I can't remember. You know, primates had not been able to we hadn't been able to develop the technology to clone primates. And, so in 2018, you were able to clone primates. So then this basically opens up this idea that, you know, it seems plausible that you could also clone humans. Right? And, of course, this is a huge, like, you know, ethical debate and so forth, but but, you know, it may be possible. Right? So then the question is, okay. You could you could clone, like, a a copy of yourself, in principle. Right? But and it would have all the say all, like, the compatible organs. You know, it's, immunologically, basically identical. Right? So, so that would be useful, right, if you wanted to swap out your parts. But the problem is you don't want to create, like, a an actual whole human with consciousness and so forth. So if you wanted to do something like this, you'd have to create a clone that never has the capacity to develop consciousness or have, like, the form the conscious forming parts of the of the brain. Right. Yeah. Exactly. You just want the body. Right? Now, is this possible? Well, actually, nature gives us a clue, like, a proof of concept that this might be possible. So there's, there's a there's a congenital birth defect called hydra andencephaly where basically most of the forebrain and cerebral hemispheres and so forth, they don't develop. But, most of the lower functions are are still preserved so that, you know, this, this fetus that has this this, birth defect, if they're allowed to develop to be, like like, birth, then also, like, you know, actually, given life support, etcetera, like, you know, feeding and so forth. There are cases where these, these, I guess, these these patients are able to, develop to adulthood. Right? Like, actually full maturation of of their body and so forth. Although, you know, for the most part, I think for legally for legal purposes, they're not considered, like, you know, conscious. Like, they're usually taken off life support, shortly after birth or whatever, and and, you know, they die. But, you know, this this gives you an idea that it might be possible to create a body without any of the conscious forming parts of the brain, you know, none of the the neocortex and and so forth. So yeah, I mean, the inside their their cranium, it's mostly just cerebrospinal fluid. Mhmm. So it's possible. Right? So then, basically, what you wanna do is combine these two things. What you would want to do is you'd you want to clone, so do some sort of somatic nuclear cell transfer, somatic cell nuclear transfer, cloning, and then you'd have to do some sort of genetic construct. Right? So do a genetic modification that would essentially knock out the the conscious forming parts of the brain. Mhmm. And then, yeah, and then you would be able to allow this to develop to maturity. And then and then this is the tricky part. So the tricky part is what do you do with the organs? You could do just, like, you know, one organ at a time kind of or, or, you know, kind of transplant if you're, you know, to swap an old kidney with an, a young kidney. Or you could do, multivisceral organs, so, like, the whole organ system. So as a matter of fact, I I I believe when people are doing, like, heart transplants or lung transplants, they usually do both at the same time because they're interconnected. It's actually just easier. But you could actually take that one step further and, like, basically do all of the, all all of the kind of, like, you know, thoracic, you know, visceral organs all interconnected all at once because then there's really only, like, four kind of, like, arterial or venous connections that you would have to reconnect and so forth. So that that way you could, you know, potentially replace all of your old, you know, aged, critical organs with with younger ones. So there's that, potential. And then the the other thing I guess the third, potential path is to do a head transplant or something like that. Like, yeah, or body transplant depending on your perspective, which, you know, people have done on model organisms. So, successful head transplants or, well, semi successful head transplant have been done on, you know, mice, dogs, even monkeys. So back in, like, the seventies, there was a there was a pioneering transplant surgeon, Robert White, who had done head transplants on on monkeys. And, the monkeys were able to survive for, like, I think, like, maybe a couple days after this transplant. But, of course, you know, those monkeys were not, were not clones. Right? So there there's going to be issues with, you know, immune immune response and so forth. So, yeah, so that's kind of, like, what you could potentially do to try and Right. Solve aging in the body, but we haven't even talked about the brain yet, which, you know, is a bigger problem. To kind of, I guess, if I understand correctly, then the most likely scenario would be that, yeah, you grow this genetically clone of yourself from, from the fetus. You would grow it, but it doesn't develop the consciousness through genetic editing, and you have the same organs and everything else like that. It grows into the body, full mature body, adult body, and then you take the organs from that husk and you put it into your body. I guess the other way could also be that you take your trying to put your consciousness into that new adult body, like a younger version of yourself, which I don't know. Like, personally, I don't think that's, very possible because the or I mean, yeah, it's it's very dependent of what constitutes your consciousness and and how do you, like, define it because we don't understand what makes you you. Like, what is where is where does your consciousness emerge from? We have, like, not a clear idea of where where is it, like, located. Is it in the brain? Is it in the nervous system? Is it the entire body? But, you know, let's say if you but pick up but if you, like, replace a kidney, you're still you. So the Yeah. But at some point, where do you lose yourself? Like, is it only at the edge of the brain? Is it at the edge of the heart? Or so that's how I guess, yeah, like, something very perplexing, at the moment. Yeah. You know, it's funny. If you do this exercise of, like, okay. I I wanna, you know, solve aging or, you know, you wanna live indefinitely or have the choice to live for as long as possible. I think all roads eventually lead to this question of, like, a hard problem with consciousness. Yeah. You can't get around it, unfortunately. Especially when it you're talking about the brain. Yeah. Mhmm. Yeah. But, you know, that's one way to, like, one by one trying to replace the organs. So, yeah, I guess that that is the heart heart problem of consciousness that we would face, like, with the brain. Like, I guess, brain replacement, how would that look like? Or yeah. Yeah. So this is so this is where things get a lot harder. So in some sense, like, replacing the body, or maybe just the organs, just like developing that the the replacement parts doesn't seem too infeasible to me. And, actually, there are people working on this in in different, you know, in different forms. So, actually, that that doesn't bother me too much. I think that could be a solved problem. The bigger problem actually is definitely in the brain. Right? Because even if you could replace all the organs and so forth or even your body with a younger, version or whatever, you know, your brain is still going to is still probably going to age. Now that being said, like, a younger body probably like, there might be a parabiosis effect where, you know, the younger body rejuvenates the brain or, you know, a younger body is better at supporting or slowing down the aging of an older brain. So there's that part to it as well. But, you know, given a long enough time scale, you're still, there's probably going to be replacement necessary or or trying to address at least the aging brain. Right? So so what do you do there? You can't, you know, just grow a new brain and replace it. Right? Like, that doesn't make any sense. Your consciousness, would be destroyed. Right? So what you can do is you can do a progressive replacement. So what you can do, is basically replace parts of the brain, like small parts at a time with, you know, engineered, like, neural tissue graphs, right, that are, you know, arranged the cell types in the right sort of layers and so forth. And, because the brain has, like, a plasticity, right, it can accept, in theory, these kinds of, like, modifications over time and, kinda, like, incorporate them. So we know, like, so I I recommend everybody go out and read a book, by Jean Hebert. He, at the time, was a researcher, professor at, Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York. He's now since actually been, recruited, at ARPA h, which is, a government, program at the at The US, kind of like a DARPA style, you know, biomedical sort of moonshots program, and, where he's heading out, research there basically on how do you repair, like, the brain with, yeah, with replacement graphs and so forth. Anyways, you you should check out, his book, Replacing Aging. And, yeah, it basically lays out, like, this potential strategy. And, and in his book, one of the proof of concepts that he, you know, uses to make this argument that it's possible is this, these cases where people get, brain cancer, a certain type of slow growing, brain tumor. I think it's got some sort of glioblastomas. And, basically, or glioma rather. And, basically, when these tumors develop in, let's say, the language center of your brain, if they if the tumor grows slowly enough, actually, these patients never lose the ability to speak or or lose their, ability for language, because the brain is actually able to compensate and migrate those language functions to other parts of the brain, if you do it slowly enough. So in that same vein, like, you could potentially replace parts of the brain by doing it slowly, and those functions could, migrate in that situation. Yeah. But it's tough. I I'm not trying to sugarcoat it and say, like, this is, like, very easy or, you know, that we'll be very successful in doing this within, you know, the text next ten years or whatever. People are trying, and and we should definitely try. But, yeah, at least there's a path forward where you could possibly see how this works. And, what would be, like, the biggest like, is there any, like, breakthroughs that would need to happen, like, in AI or some other biotech field? Or Yeah. I mean, AI would be generally useful if you're thinking about just, like, you know, could you just create more even human level researchers to work on the problem? Right? Like, that's just like a lever that you could apply. And then I don't know. I I can't speculate on, like, super intelligence and, like, creating, you know, like, you know, super genius AI agents that would solve it for you. At that point, you're just, I don't know, you're kind of hoping that, you know, God God comes out, like deus ex machina literally just God comes down from the the stage or whatever and solves the problem. But if you're talking about just, like, yeah, what breakthroughs, I think, first of all, I need to say that it's just, like, it's a very niche field. There's not that many people working on on brain replacement, and, in this particular field. So just getting more people involved, there's a lot of, like, low hanging fruit just there. Right? Just, you know, leveraging what we know or just, like, researching more in that direction. Right? But then, yeah, the the thing that I'm really, really, like, excited about is, you know, the fact that Jean Hebert is, you know, at ARPAH heading this this program where, you know, they're going to put, you know, potentially hundreds of millions of dollars into research in how to, you know, develop these these neural tissue graphs and then actually get to a a clinical proof of concept. So, so I think the first thing that they probably would be interested in is, like, stroke or maybe traumatic brain injury. Maybe in you know, this might be useful even for the military. Right? Like, would people have, like, a brain injury? How might you, like, repair that first? Right? So, like, an acute injury, you know, try and develop these graphs, see if you can restore function. And, I think that could be done, actually, or at least test it, do a thorough, kind of, like, reasonable attempt within the next five to ten years. So, but you know, I think the main thing is like, even though people have done sort of like, you know, brain cell transplants, like, there's several companies working on this for, like, Parkinson's. Right? Like, transplanting, dopaminergic neurons into the brain and see if that, like, can restore function. So, like, that might be an early proof of concept of just, like, yeah, you know, you can at least put in new, you know, brain cells into the brain and and they can integrate. But then, yeah, moving forward, you'd have to show, like, if you're doing, like, larger graphs, that this would work in a primate model first and then and then, yeah, and then into, into humans. But, like, I think a lot of the challenge is, yeah, how to actually do that, what are the, you know, right cell types, how to actually, you know, configure and engineer these these graphs in the right way, because, like yeah. Yeah. It's it's a complicated Yeah. I guess engineering problem. They just need to try it and do a lot of experiments. That's how you're gonna make the most progress. And, I guess the another thing that you could think about is, just becoming like a cyborg. So, like, instead of, you know, having bio biological organs replaced and the tissue replaced, you could just, you know, why not just have mechanical tissue and become like a cyborg and then just try to figure out how do you maintain the consciousness, with the with the brain. Like, maybe you just just have the brain and the nervous system and everything else is, like, a cyborg, version. Yeah. Yeah. So there are people kind of working on pieces of this, and parts of this kind of, like, idea of, like, yeah, synthetic replacements. So, you know, people already have there are a few people today who have, like, artificial hearts. Right? They're not very good. They don't last very long. But it it might be possible. And then if you're thinking even, like, one step above that, just like, okay. What if we replace the entire body with, like, a synthetic body? Like, literally, the only thing that the body does is it, you know, it it it's a life support system for the brain, essentially. Right? So how could you replicate that, you know, artificially? So there is a group at Yale that, I think it was last year they published some interesting stuff in brain perfusions. So, basically, they took out the brain of a recently deceased pig, and they put it in this kind of, like, bath, I I would say, some sort of, like, perfusion of, like, I I I guess it's blood, but other, like, metabolites and other, like, compounds. And and they were able to measure, like, brain activity for, like, I think it was months. It was at least weeks, right, afterwards. So yeah. And there's a there's a company forming around this mostly for, I think they're using it as a platform for brain research. It's called, Bexorg. Anyways, the the the platform at the in the paper, I think it was called BrainX. And anyways, point being is, you know, it it might be possible to, you know, create just, like, an artificial life support system for the brain. So that might be one potential path, like a synthetic Yeah. Replacement. Yeah. And then and then you can pair that with, like, all the work that's already going on in, like, brain computer interfaces. So that's already extremely well funded. There's multiple companies in that space. Elon obviously has a Neuralink, and that seems, like, feasible. Like, they are it's already somewhat functional. Right? Like, yeah. I mean, I think that looks like, yeah, like, it's gonna be the one of future iPhones that everyone will have, like, some sort of interface. I wanna take a quick break to let you know that you can now get my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. It contains 24 chapters ranging from the biology of aging to all the major chronic diseases such as heart disease, kidney disease, neurodegeneration, and I also cover over 70 clinically relevant biomarkers for chronic diseases and their optimal ranges. You can get the book from the link in the description. But, I think that that can also be like a segue to the second step in the road map, which is a biostasis of a pausing aging indefinitely in the body. And, you know, if you, like, pause aging of the organs, then you don't need to replace them either, theoretically. Or if you, like, reverse through epigenetics somehow the from a old heart to a young heart, your body would regenerate itself. I guess, theoretically, it will be possible. Some species do it, like some of the jellyfish and such. So, yeah, what can you tell us about that? Yeah. So, yeah, biostasis is, one of the other paths in the in the L BF road map, one of the three. And, in some sense, it's not really, a full solution for aging, so it's kinda sneaky in that sense. Mhmm. It's more just trying to pause biological time, potentially for not indefinitely, but, like, for a very, very, very long time. Like, so, yeah, so, basically, with biostasis, there's kind of, like, two main paths there. I would say maybe three two and a half, let's say. So the first one is, you know, cryonics or cryopreservation. So, we already cryopreserve certain cells. Right? People can freeze their eggs. People freeze sperm, etcetera. And, at extremely low temperatures, basically, most biological processes or, well, basically, all biological processes come to almost a halt, like, almost a a standstill. Right? And so in that way, you you could potentially preserve, you know, the, you know, your tissues, your brain, your your body in a certain state for for, I don't know, definitely thousands, maybe more amount of time. And then and then the strategy is yeah. That gives you time to actually you know, for a civilization to develop the technologies, necessary to both, you know, revive you, but also solve the the biomedical issue that that kind of, like, necessitated, you know, putting you under, cryostasis in the first place. Right? Mhmm. So that's kind of like the biostasis, philosophy. And you can do that with low temperature. You have to use, like, certain things like cryoprotectants, prevent, ice formation, which, you know, kills cells and so forth and and and kills tissues. But, that's kinda like one branch. There's also a smaller kind of, like, field within that field, looking not just at, cryopreservation, but also, like, chemical fixation. So you might be able to preserve using, like, certain aldehydes, like, glutaraldehyde and so forth, chemicals that basically, cross link all your proteins. So it just kinda, like, glues them in place, essentially. But the the issue there is, with chemical fixation is, it's very difficult to undo those, chemical changes, and it might require just, like, really, really, really advanced technology. Some people think that maybe you don't even unglue it at all. And what you would do is you would just preserve your brain, and then you would, like, scan it somehow, destructively, or whatever, with, like, slice it into into very thin slices and then reconstitute it, like, in a in a computer and do an emulation. I think that's, like, really in the the realm of sci fi. Although, you know, people have been mapping, you know, connectomes of, like, model organisms. Like, the fly, I think, was just recently done. So, yeah, that that's maybe one potential fact. And then the other one, the kinda like the two and a half is, maybe, like, something that's more gentle, like a a hibernation of some sort. So, you know, certain mammals are very good at at hibernating. They can reduce, like, certain squirrels, you know, bears, and so forth. They can reduce their, like, metabolism to, like, you know, 10% of what it normally runs at. So if you if you believe that you can reduce, like, all metabolism to, like, 10%, then maybe you could extend your lifespan, significantly if put into, like, a hibernation sort of state. Right. So that's that's kind of like the situation with, the biostasis path. And, people are working on this. There's there's companies. Just recently, Laura Deming, who used to be, well, was the founder of the Longevity Fund, which was the first longevity venture fund. She was a Thiel Fellow. Yeah. She raised, I think $40,000,000 for a company called, Cradle Health, and they're basically yeah. Their mission is to demonstrate reversible cryopreservation, biostasis. And, yeah, there's a there's a lot of interesting interim applications for this stuff too, like, back to the organ shortage sort of thing. One of the reasons why, you know, we have so few, viable organs, for transplant is, like, when someone dies, right, like, you have we we can't there's no way to, like, preserve that organ at room temperature. Well, no good way to do that for for a long time. Right? So generally speaking, you always hear about, like, you know, someone dies, they have to, like, put this heart, like, on an emergency plane, and then ship it to the person, and then and do the do the transplant surgery immediately because there's just no time. Right? But if you could actually bank, you know, these organs, then you could actually increase the supply significantly because then any person who just, like, dies, and is on the, like, the donor list, the donor organ donor list, you know, you could just preserve the organ and then wait until it's it's needed. Right? So, so people have been, preserving, organs of, like, of smaller mammals, so, like, rats, and also rabbits. I think, the kidney of of those organisms have been successfully cryopreserved and then rewarmed and then transplanted back into an animal and, functional. So there are some, like, early proofs of concept that this is definitely possible. So but, you know, still early days. Right. I could see it. Like, you could, you know, cry or freeze your DNA or something as well, and maybe in a few thousand million years or something like that, they'll be able to resurrect you from your DNA or something like that. Oh, yeah. Well, cells cells are very easy to cryopreserve. So you could you could cryopreserve yourselves today, and, and someone could potentially clone you in the future if you if you are interested in that. Yeah. But, other things that people are doing, have you heard of this company, Forever Labs? No. Okay. Yeah. So they do, bone marrow banking, essentially. So you can you can extract bone marrow. If you're younger, it it might be yeah. You you could basically take the young version of your your bone marrow, bank it, and then you'd have these stem cells, which are you know, the bone marrow, stem cells are basically the the cells that give rise to all your your your blood cells. Right? So and also your basically, the immune cells. Right? Mhmm. So, if you wanted to potentially, you know, rejuvenate your immune system in the future when you're older, you you could bake your your bone marrow today. I haven't done it, but I actually know people who have. Yeah. So it's interesting, approach. Gotcha. Is there is there ways to, like, halt the aging of the organism without the cryo, so that you'd some sort of gene therapy or some sort of, pills or some medic medic medic like, medical therapies. Yeah. I mean, this is the this is the big question. And I think that's kind of like heading more into the realm of the bioengineering aspect. Right? Where at that point, you kinda have to understand, like, what is you have to develop a sufficient understanding of what are the things that are going wrong. Right? Or what are the processes that actually lead to aging, and how do you and actually intervene to to halt them or slow them down, or potentially even reverse them. So there's all sorts of different philosophies around, like, what should be the best path going forward. But, in terms of, like, doing but if you wanted to do just, like, biostasis with, like, just taking a pill, I don't know that that you know, I I don't know of any way to do that right now other than maybe something like a a hibernation. So I know, there are you know? I think there was a a paper I saw where people tried to stimulate, like, a certain part of the the brain in a rodent, like in a rat or a mouse, and then try to induce, like, a a torpor state so that it would reduce its metabolism. So maybe there's there's something more in the hibernation realm where you could slow down, biological time, let's say. Mhmm. But, I don't know that you could halt it in the same way that, you know, you would be able to with, like, just chemistry physics, which would be like the Right. Cryopreservation or chemical fixation route. Yeah. Gotcha. Yeah. I guess, yeah, then then we can go to the third last step, bioengineering. Yeah. So bioengineering is, in my view, the hardest and potentially the fuzziest, branch on the LBF road map. And the reason being is basically, yeah, bioengineering is your your default mode where it's basically, hey. You know, there's all this stuff that's going on in biology. We just have to, like, sufficiently understand biology or develop the tools to understand it, which could involve, like, AI models and etcetera. Right? And then once you kind of, like, have a sufficient understanding or model of of what's going on, at the cellular and molecular level, then you have to start intervening. And and that's also extremely difficult, You know, just being able to, let's say, you know, genetically modify every cell in your body, like, with, you know, precision and, and efficiency, like, you know, that seems very difficult. Yeah. And and maybe you could use, you know, also cell therapies, you know, engineer different cells to do certain things and different functions. But at the end of the day, yeah, it probably will involve some sort of, you know, capabilities to do genetic modifications at scale, which currently, you know, people are trying to work towards that. Like, you know, gene therapies exist. There are, you know, FDA approved gene therapies. But, generally, like, the those gene therapies, like, the the delivery methods are are quite crude, in compare compared to what we would like to do, which is basically have full control of all the genome like, the entire genome in all your cells, right, and all different cell types. Whereas today, with gene delivery, you know, most people are using, like, AAV vectors or lipid nanoparticles, but these generally, have, like, a couple different problems. Like one, like, they a lot of these, vectors, you know, they have a certain affinity to different tissue types, so they they don't go to all the cells in your body. They'll, like, you know, usually localize to certain certain tissues, which is is fine if you're trying to solve, like, a a disease that's localized to a certain tissue. But, for aging, you you would need to be able to address the mass vast majority of all the different cells in all your tissues. Right? So so that's one problem. And then the other thing is, like, redosing, which is just, like, yeah, being able to repeat, these gene therapies because, like, potentially, you know, you do it once to rejuvenate, but you might have to do it again and and so forth to to con continue rejuvenating. So, yeah. So that's also another another problem. But, yeah, it's it's it's very difficult for me to see, like, how this is all going to fully pan out in the bioengineering world. People are working on like, for various reasons, just trying to develop these capabilities for addressing, you know, just normal diseases, not even just for aging. But, yeah, potentially, you know, if if, you know, we develop, like, very advanced AI, there there might be some breakthroughs in in maybe the understanding of aging, with, like, you know, if we just generate, like, massive datasets on on everything that's going on in the body at different ages, you know, like, longitudinally, and I just, like, crank it through this, you know, these LLMs or whatever, these, you know, these neural networks. Maybe. I don't know. But that's like pure speculation. It's just like not clear to me, within like, within a ten year timeframe that you could solve this without just like, I I don't know, allocating massive amount of resources to this problem. And even then, maybe it it's just far beyond reach. Right? Right. What would be, like, the first important step to focus on? What do you think is the biggest, like, first barrier right now? Yeah. I mean, there's a lot of different opinions on this. So some people would would say that, you know, just doing, like, pharmaceutical interventions, like, you know, like, you know, small molecule drugs. Like, we have small molecule drugs that that slow down aging, quote, unquote, or extend lifespan in model organisms like like rapamycin. Right? Like, this is a very well well known actually, do you take rapamycin? Can I ask you that? No. Okay. Let me take it right now. Apparently, Brian Johnson recently stopped taking Rapa. So all the the Rapa Bros are in shambles now, I guess. Right. Well, I think that that's the most likely to work right now. So, like, any other supplement isn't gonna extend your lifespan probably, but rapamycin probably will a little bit. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I don't take rapamycin, and I'm I'm not a doctor. This is not medical advice. I'm just saying, yeah, in in some sense, you can think of, like, these pharmaceuticals as, like, a very crude, primitive bioengineering where you you have some sort of model of what's going on, like, you know, mTOR pathway, and then you're like, okay, and I have this, you know, very crude device, which is a small molecule to try and, you know, drug this target, and maybe that could slow aging a little bit. But generally speaking, I think most people who are even developing these these small molecule drugs for aging would agree that that most of the stuff is going to be small effect size. Like, even in mice, like, it only extends vampromycin only extends lysophan by, like, maximum lysophan by, like, you know, 15%, in mice. And this is, like, the best, most well characterized, you know, antiaging drug that we have in in mice compound or whatever. So so that's maybe one way to do it, but then we're getting back into the kind of, like, oh, what we're really trying to do is just, like, show the first first proof of concept, and that would just wake up the world to actually invest more money into, like, the actual stuff that would get us over the line to indefinite lifespan. So, yeah, I kind of I I'm glad people are working on that. I I don't think that's, like, a a bad idea by any stretch. I think it's definitely a plausible, model of what's going on. But I also think that we need to be working on, like, the actual technical stuff that would get us over the line, now, today, not just in the future when everybody has woken up to it. So in that, in that sense, what I think people should, you know, be working on in my mind is probably like, yeah, just better gene delivery. Right? So let's say you just wanted to brute force this problem, right, and figure out, like, how how can we reverse aging or slow down aging drastically in mice, as a proof as just like first. So and then, you know, and then try it in, you know, primates and then and then humans. And, you know, I think for the strategy there, given time constraints, like, if you're trying to save people who are alive today, right, and just do it as quickly as possible, then you you probably wanna show, age reversal. Right? Because if you're just slowing down aging, it just takes a really long time to detect that. Whereas if you can reverse aging, right, that that's going to be a very strong signal, and you'll see it immediately. I think this is very in line with, like, what George Church is trying to do, in his perspective on, yeah, let's focus on reversing aging. So in that line, okay. How would you demonstrate reversal of aging first, maybe in a model organism and then move it up to, like, primates and then humans, clinical trials? Well, to do that, you'd have to have some sort of, like, genetic intervention probably. But how do you actually do that? Well, there's two ways. You can either do, like, a transgenic, breed. So you you would start, like, by, like, modifying some embryos or whatever, creating, like, a a strain of mice and then and then letting them, I guess, develop to maturity, and then maybe you turn on the genes. You know, people have done this with, like, OSK. Well well, actually, they've done this with, like, senolytic mice. Anyways, yeah, it's kind of, besides the point. But that takes a long time too. Right? Like, if you're just creating these transgenic feeds, letting them, like, age, and then, you know, turning on the genes and seeing what happens. You know, mice live for, like, you know, can live, like, two to three years or something like that. So, that would take a long time even if you did it at scale. So, actually, what you probably want to do is develop, you know, delivery, better delivery, like, of, of genes so that you could just have, like, a massive warehouse of just, like, of mice. Right? And then once they get to a certain age, so you just have, like, constant stream of old mice, then you can just, like, you know, deliver these genes, to their entire body and then just say, okay. Now that I have, like, great control, fine control over these genetic interventions, now we can just, like, multiplex and just, like, try different combinations, at scale at, like, incredibly large scale, and then feed this into probably some sort of AI model to see if, like and then measure, and that's also tricky. Like, what do you measure? And then feed this back into a model and then try and, you know, propose what the next set of interventions should be. Right? So there's that. Or you could try doing something where if you had really great modeling, you could just try and do this all in silicone and just like scale skip the mice altogether. But that seems very far even now today because, like, you know, people are trying to simulate even just, like, a single cell, and that's, like, very difficult. Right? But, yeah, if you had to ask me, the the path forward, if I had to just brute force it, yeah, Focus on gene delivery, technology, and then just do this on mice, different combinations at scale. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. It makes sense that, yeah, like, gene therapy is probably gonna be the more effective, like, the more but will deliver the results. Yeah. Like, the drugs or something like that. You know, you're not really, you know, replacing the organs or something like that. So the gene therapy is probably gonna be more important. Yeah. And I think the important thing to say is that, like, people are already trying to develop this capability even if they're not interested in aging because it's just, like, useful for Yeah. Treating different diseases. Yeah. So that's one, I guess, bright thing to be, like, optimistic about. Yeah. Yeah, like, I guess we can start wrapping up. And you also, like, are one of the cofounder of this, vitalist organization, which, as I understand, is like a like a you you can maybe, like, explain it a bit better. Yeah. Yeah. I think maybe the question that I should start with is, my favorite question, which is, how long do you want to live? Like, I've always liked the idea that, okay, I I have we we figure out how to how long like, how to live forever, but then everyone chooses to die, like, at some point. Like, that that would be like because there's no virtue in dying because you can't choose, but there is virtue in being choosing death if you have the option to live forever, you know, if that makes sense. Like, no one is virtuous for dying because there no one else because there's no other option. Like, everyone will die as of now. But if you have the option to to be immortal but you choose to die, then that's kind of a more virtuous approach. Okay. That's interesting. I've never heard anybody give back answer before. Because I've I've literally asked, I don't know, hundreds of people, maybe almost a thousand. I don't know because, you know, this is one of the questions that, we ask on the application form for longevity biotech fellowship. And, I also have gone around, like, different cities in the world just doing, like, street surveys, asking random people on the street how long they want to live, you know, my Uber drivers, you know, whatever. And I can tell you that it's it's strange. Do you know do you know what most people say, actually? Can you guess? They'll say something like sixties, seventies, beef you know, they wanna die before they get the, like, the problems of aging. Yeah. Kind of. Actually okay. So I would say 80% of people will tell me something like eighty, ninety, or a 100. Right? Like, 80% of people will say that. And then the other 20% will usually say something like, yeah. Like, a really big number, they might say, like, 500. Some people will say forever, obviously. Right? And then and then other people, yeah, I I've heard some, like, weirder answers where it's just like, yeah, tomorrow or something like that. Some people are unfortunately depressed. But, yeah, you know, this is an interesting question because, it really strikes to the heart of, you know, why do any of this at all? Right? Like, why why why get involved in in longevity? Why should we work on, you know, developing therapies for aging? Why, I don't know, why do any biohacking or anything like this, like, in in diet nutrition? Like like, at the end of the day, right, we're really asking ourselves, like, what's what's important in life? Like, what are the things that are are truly, like, impactful? Right? You have to look at what society really values. Right? And at a deep level, I think everybody understands that that life is good. Right? Like and death is bad. Like, this is, like, a a fundamental feature of most, like, philosophy systems, religions, and so forth in society. Like, we know that life is good and death is bad. We try our best to preserve life. And, and, you know, death is just, you know, horrible. Like, it's just like a it it is causes so much pain for for so many people involved, and, and it's the the ultimate extinguishing of, like, of choice and, like, and, optionality. Right? Like, it's just like a cessation a cessation of of, of, you know, potential experience. Right? And this is bad. Right? But despite that fact, right, like, we have I think people are obviously awakening to this idea that, you know, death, or so aging is the thing that causes most death. Right? Like like, eighty percent or so of people alive today are basically on track to die of of aging and, in age related diseases, essentially. Right? So that's, you know, cancer, Alzheimer's, you know, what have you, heart disease as well. And this is not just like a feature of just, like, you know, wealthy nations. Right? Like, it's this is, you know, rapidly happening to, like, the developing world as well. So, so then the the big question is, like, why aren't we doing anything about this? Right? Like, it it seems just, like, insane that we devote so few resources to the thing that happens to be killing the most number of people. Right? Like so just to give you context on, like, how little, you know, resources are actually devoted to to aging. So in The US, you know, the main funder of biomedical research is the NIH, but less than, I think it's about 0.5% of the, NIH budget is actually devoted to studying fundamental aging biology. So the thing that is killing the most people. So only 0.5%. Right? So this is ridiculous. Right? Like, this is like we we should be up in arms about the current situation that basically, nobody cares and nobody is trying to do anything about the thing that is killing the the most number of people. So for us, you know, I ended up, cofounding this, this nonprofit and this, essentially, you know, political social political, movement with, Adam Gries to basically it's a a returning to, you know, this fundamental moral precept that life is good and death is bad. And if aging is the thing that kills most people, then we should definitely make this our number one priority. Right? Like, fighting aging and death should be humanity's number one priority. And, so that's basically what what we're trying to do with, Vitalism Foundation, you know, create this this movement to advocate for actually devoting massive amount of resources. And and what we what we're trying to envision here is, like, an Apollo program for aging. And and why not? Like, you know, people we we've you know, humans have been able to do, like, really incredible things and devote, a mass amount of resources to things that, that, that are really important. And we're just trying to highlight that, you know, this is, we're coming to the point in time, where we have the ability to actually start thinking about actually solving this problem of aging. Whereas maybe in the past, you know, it it it has been out of reach. So we're trying to, you know, raise the awareness and the raise the alarm, basically say, hey. This is this is happening. This is an emergency. We need to do something about this and devote the the appropriate amount of resources to to doing, fighting aging and death. So what we think is an appropriate amount of resources is about, like, 1% of global GDP. And, you know, Elon actually recently had the same idea. But for, like, making, human life, like, multiplanatories, he's like, yeah. We should this is an important thing. We should devote one percent of resources, to fighting or or to, you know, going to Mars and and establishing a colony there. And, for other purposes for other, like, causes as well. Like, I think it was in the seventies or something like that. The UN came together and they, jointly, decided that, you know, that, they should devote, I think it was, like, 0.7% of GDP to, like, world GDP to fight, like, poverty or something like that. Right? Like Mhmm. So I think these are, you know, these are grand and, you know, goals that like, civilizational goals that we should really be thinking about. And aging is, like, by far, to me, the one that is the one that stands out the most because it is it is killing people today. Right? Like, hundreds of thousands of people are dying of aging and age related is rage related diseases today. Yeah? Mhmm. Yeah. And, I mean, you know, with that, it's like the same with, like, the Apollo project. You know, there's a ton of other valuable things that came from that, like refrigeration and, you know, whatever other everyday things that we actually use. So with if you if you have, like, a massive Manhattan project for aging and longevity life extension, then, you know, you'll in the process, you'll figure out how to properly cure cancer and, other things as well. So yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. I mean, like, just, you know, from our conversation of all these, like, tools that you would develop or technologies, they could be useful for all sorts of different things. Right? So, like, gene gene delivery could be useful for treating various diseases, some that have have nothing to do with aging. And, and also, like, replacement, like, if you got in, like, a an injury, you know, a car accident or something like that, You know, even though that's not aging that's killing you, you would still need potentially replacement Yeah. Organs, critical parts, etcetera. So, yeah, you would probably develop a lot of, useful technologies in in the process as well. Yeah. Mhmm. So right now, do you, like, yeah, like, do you have, like, some sort of investment fund or some projects that, you know, where people can, like, direct their attention or focus? Yeah. So the first thing, to do in any sort of, like, movement, is basically find the people who who who who agree with you. Right? So, you know, it's it's kind of a unique situation with fatalism in the sense that it's kind of a a natural philosophy in some sort of way, you know, unlike, you know, certain religions, basically all religions, where it starts with one person who comes up with the idea and has to, like, convince everyone around them to join. Right? And then, like, it's, like, one by one. You know, this idea of vitalism. Right? Like that, you know, life is good, death is bad, and we need to fight aging and death. Unlike other religions and philosophies, actually, vitalism is unique in the sense that a lot of people just come to this conclusion on their own that, you know, life is good, death is bad. I should do everything I can, to fight fight aging and death. So in that sense, what we're trying to do, the first step is is just to find all the people who already agree with you, who already, you know, just came to this conclusion on their own, which there could be, like, hundreds of thousands, if not, like, millions of people around the world who actually already believe this. But the only thing the the the tricky part is that there's never been a way to to identify and rally around, like, a a common, like, identifier around this. So just coming up with the name, vitalism, giving it a definition, and making it clear, is kinda like the first step so that people can actually say, yeah. That's something that I already believe, and, we should definitely work together to try and achieve this common goal. Right? So it's the idea of, like, coordinating, around, like, a a clearly defined, word, right, an an ism. Whereas if you just said, oh, we're trying to find all the people who are interested in longevity. Like, that word doesn't mean anything anymore because some people think, you know, it it means, like, health span and, like, you know, diet interventions and stuff like that. But for us, it means a very different thing. So yeah. So the first step is to just, like, gather together and coordinate the people who already, are working on this and who already believe this. So, so we have a a community. It's, you guys if people listening to this, if this resonates with you, you can check it out at vitalism.io. And, and then once we have, like, a a certain critical mass of people who are working together, connected in a community, then we can actually start, pushing things on the political stage because it's not enough. Like, I I I think it's great that, you know, people who are working on the science and the technology, you know, building start ups and so forth, I think that's really important. But at the end of the day, you know, we're in this situation where there's just so few resources dedicated to the problem. We're just taking so few shots on goal. Whereas what we really want to do is do something like a Apollo program or Operation Warp Speed, to solve this problem of aging. So in order to do that, you need to get into the political game. Right? Like, there's there's no other way around it. So there's different ways that you can, you know, conceptualize this, but a lot of it is just both, you know, the traditional sort of awareness campaigns, you know, grassroots sort of like, you know, talk to as many people, do more, you know, science advocacy, public awareness. But then there's other things, other strategies that can be employed as well, which, are more, let's say, in the realm of, like, how how could you, like, short circuit or, like, hack your way into political prominence? A couple different models there. So Balaji Srinivasan had proposed, like, this network state idea, right, where basically you take, like, a Internet first community, and then they know, come together, they connect, and then they crowdfund, you know, territories around the world. And then and then, you know, have an on chain consensus of, you know, their GDP and so forth, and then get to political recognition. So that's, like, one extremely new way that, that's being tried. Other things like, like the free state project in The United States, where basically a bunch of libertarians got together and said, hey. What if we all, you know, did this, like, densification and concentration of people who are politically aligned in one place, like one political jurisdiction, so a state in The US. And they selected New Hampshire, and then, you know, now they've become kind of like a political force, there. And, so there's different ways you could think about this. And, you know, similarly, instead of like a free state project, you could do something like a a longevity state project where it's just like, hey. How can we get, like, that first rung of political significance that people would recognize you? And, yeah, you could do something like a a political migration. So these are, like, different, you know, things that, we're looking at the Vitalism Foundation and and developing, you know, the road map for. But then the other thing that I wanna mention, which is, which we're really excited about and we just recently announced is Vitalist Bay. So this is, an ambitious project that, that we're undertaking. It's basically a eight week longevity zone that's going to be centered, around Berkeley, California, basically trying to take over this, the city for for eight weeks, to make it like a a long a place for where longevity is the number one priority. And we're bringing in, inviting, you know, thousands of experts from around the world in all different domains, not just like, you know, science and technology, but also policy, health and wellness, you know, also people from crypto and and DeSci and so forth, and bringing them all together, with this common goal to spark essentially, yeah, a a Manhattan project, a Apollo program, to solve aging. Right? And, so, yeah, that's happening, next year or sorry. Not next year. This year's time. Year. Because now it's January. Yeah. It's happening in, April and May of this year in Berkeley, California. It's eight weeks. We have eight weekly, themes, around longevity, different lenses to to attack this problem of aging. And, we have this campus, that we've secured for two months. It's, actually at Lighthaven, which is, kind of like the this, campus that the the rationalists, the the rationality community people who run, like, Lechteng and so forth, have. And, you know, so we've, rented this for two months. It's basically combining both, like, longevity first co living. So we're going to make, like, the most healthy, you know, environment, in the world, centered around, this this campus. And, I think, yeah, basically 70 people can live, right on campus here in Berkeley. But we're also going to have, like, events, so conferences. So every week, there's going to be some sort of event, around, you know, these these eight weekly themes, everything from, you know, longevity science, health and wellness, to investing, de scy, you know, policy, etcetera. And, yeah. So we're super excited about that. And, if people are interested in getting involved in in this, you know, in this event, they can, they can check out our website at, vitalistbay,uh,.com. And, yeah, looking for people who are super ambitious, who want to, you know, join us, either as, like, as a resident or if you just want to come to the events, maybe you already live in the Bay Area, then then that's cool too. Yeah. So that's happening in April and May of next year. LBF actually is also going to be kinda like a affiliated event, just right before that. So March 31 to April 4, at the same, location. So if people are interested in, you know, getting involved on the technical side, connecting with other people who are building projects, and wanna get up to speed on, you know, on the different technologies, to solve aging, yes. They should check out our our website at, longbiofellowship.org and apply for the next cohort, which is, our sixth cohort, actually, going to be, yeah, at, in Berkeley this year. Yeah. Yeah. So Good. That's that's the idea. Just, you know, for a vitalist bay, just create the most noise and, energy and, I guess, the density, right, like, of of, bright people and, ambitious minds together, around this common goal. And, and, we're going to be doing it in the Bay Area, which is essentially, you know, the place where I think there's a lot of latent interest, right, in these sorts of ideas, but also where a lot of, like, you know, the tech influence and capital and I guess that's where the tech culture, emanates from. So if we can really make this, like, the biggest, you know, longevity cultural event in all of history and frame it in such a way that it's, you know, ambitious and saying, hey. Yeah. We actually have to do something about aging and, you know, because it's an emergency, then, yeah, then we can actually spark something really amazing there and have a chance at actually, you know, trying to solve this problem. So that's kind of our our our grand ambition and our grand goal. Yeah. That sounds awesome. And, we'll put links in the show notes for people to check it out. And, where can people learn more about you and your work? Oh, yeah. I guess the easiest way is to follow me on Twitter. That's where I'm most or x where I'm most active. So, yeah, real Nathan Chang. But, I also I also have a newsletter, which, I I always say I'm going to, you know, release the next newsletter, but, I've been just so sidetracked with, all these different projects. So people can subscribe to that Substack. I think there's a link in my in my profile on x if they wanna find it, but it's a longevity market cap newsletter. And, and if people are interested in venture capital, in investing, they can also check out, healthspan capital, .vc. So that's our website. We're actually a fund that's publicly available on, on AngelList. So, basically, any accredited investor can technically, join our fund. That was kind of, like, one of the reasons why we started the fund in the first place, to make it, you know, kind of, like, semi democratized, and allow people to have exposure to these investments because, yeah, it's difficult to, to have exposure unless you, you know, join one of these really large funds. But, yeah, so we're like a a rolling fund on AngelList that people can access as well. I think that's mostly it. Yeah. And then, Vitalist BAE, is, you can find that at vitalistbae.com if you wanna apply to join us there. And I think that's mostly oh, yeah. Vitalism.io. So if you're interested in joining this community and this movement to, you know, make, fighting aging and death humanity's number one priority, then you can check us out also at, vitalism.io. Sounds good. And my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you'd have to sooner? Oh, okay. Yeah. This is a good one. Good question. Yeah. Okay. So so the context here is, with the longevity biotech fellowship, we do this, like, four day, like, workshop retreat where we're bringing in these newcomers. We get them up to speed, connect them with, each other and also mentors and etcetera etcetera. But then we do this thing, these, mastermind groups afterwards as an online program for the cohort, after the workshop retreat. And, one of the things that we did, with the these mastermind groups that are led by some of the mentors, I I lead some of the groups as well, is we went through this book. I don't know if you know this book, The Great CEO Within. No. Okay. So then okay. So maybe my answer is, read that book Okay. Which which is, which I wish I had done sooner. Well, not just read it, but, like, actually try and implement some of the its practices. So, basically, you know, the book, it's written by Matt Bouchari. He's a CEO coach, and he was a CEO coach to many of the, you know, some of the top, like, Silicon Valley CEOs, like Sam Altman, Brian Armstrong at Coinbase, etcetera, etcetera. And it's structured in such a way that it's just like, a bunch of short recipes, just basically standard operating procedures on just how to get how to get stuff done effectively, right, both in yourself, but also in Teams. Right? And, so there's a lot of great advice in there. I don't know if I wanna get in into too many, but one of the ones that I felt was really important was, yeah, basically, having weekly reviews. Right? Like, actually setting out time to write down, like, and reflect on your week and what lessons you've learned and how to improve. Because I think if you want to, you know, get better at what you're doing, whatever it is you're doing in life, potentially, like, trying to solve aging, then, yeah, you need to be able to have some sort of, consistent iteration feedback loop where you're saying, okay. What went wrong? How can I address this? What experiments can I try to address these issues that I've identified? And then just continually run this in a loop. And, for whatever reason, like, I didn't have a great system to do that. Like, I wasn't very disciplined to do that. And but, yeah, just this year, yeah, just really, you know, doubling down on that on, like, just writing writing for yourself and, and on a consistent cadence, like, in a reflective way, has been very useful in my life at least. Yeah. So I recommend it for everyone else. Mhmm. Sounds good. Well, it's been a very insightful and interesting conversation. And, yeah, definitely looking forward to, you know, what's gonna happen in the next few few years and decades. But, yeah, thanks for coming to the show, and, yeah, I'll I'll see you around. Awesome. Thanks, Sim. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Sim. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.