The amount of energy you're getting from the sun can easily burn a hole in the retina or the back of the eye. I don't wish that on anybody because usually once that tissue is gone, it is gone. It's not gonna come back. And so people end up with permanent holes in their vision from it. This is showing again, of yellow light, red light, and near infrared light cannot only slow down the development of age related macular degeneration, but also restore some usable eyesight. Doctor Ellen, welcome to the show. Hey. Thank you so much. Again, this is an honor to to be here, to be invited and to talk about eye stuff. Yeah. I'm excited and, you know, eyes are one of these interesting organs or, you know, devices that, don't get that much attention. But when you look at it, then they're quite important to our overall health, but also just, you know, life satisfaction. Yeah. It's it is a it's often something I think it's human nature to always be more reactive. Right? We don't think about it until there's a problem and unfortunately with the eyes when there starts to be a problem it's usually too late to do anything about it. So it's it's kind of the long story of, you know, better to do a prevention and do what you can early on in life, rather than be reactive later on once once things have started. Yeah. And one very fascinating thing about the eyes is that they're actually connected to your brain. Mhmm. So in some sense, they could be considered like an extension of your brain which, you know, most people don't really think about. Is that is that true? Yeah. Absolutely. One of my colleagues, I think, kind of famously said that they're the only like internal organ of your body that is facing the outside of the body. And yeah, the the retina is an extension of your brain. That's interesting. And with age, eyesight or eye health tends to deteriorate. Why is that so? Like, is it is there something, I guess, intrinsically vulnerable about the eyes or is it just, you know, natural aging that every every other organ also deteriorates with age? And certainly age plays plays a big role in in what's going on the eye and why I think the eye is maybe more susceptible to a lot of aging changes is because it is one of the most highly metabolic tissues in the body and I've seen some publications saying it is the most highly metabolic tissue. And part of that is because of the massive amount of energy it takes to process vision and send the proper signals to the brain, but also because the eye is constantly being being being bombarded with light energy and your body has to respond by fixing any sort of reaction, reactive oxygen species or oxidation but also manage the inflammatory cascade that cells are also going through because of those same processes and and that relates to a lot of different eye diseases. And is is like poor eyesight so like with oral health at least, there is this association between poor oral health and other systemic diseases like heart disease or Alzheimer's. Is there anything something like that with eyes that, poor eyesight walks hand in hand with, I don't know diabetes or heart disease or something else or is it could you could you also be just, you know, genetic or, I guess random? Yeah. So it's definitely a little bit of both. We do know that some genetic components increase your likelihood of various eye diseases, but there is a lot of associations, right? If you are somebody who is more obese, you have type two diabetes or any other form of diabetes or high blood pressure, this dramatically increases the risk of various eye conditions, in fact have direct disease processes within the eye. But also, you know, if you're somebody who has problems with your eyesight even early on in life or it's deteriorating, then there's also higher risks for other like dementia and aging other issues because your brain's not getting the same amount of information and you're more likely to become sedentary and that just sort of compounds everything. Right? Then you're not moving as much and then we see higher rates of cardiovascular disease and it just and depression and it just sort of cascades. So there's definitely a relationship to many different processes within the body. Yeah. It's interesting then, you know, too much screen time, too much technology use, you know, watching too much TV or something like that. Irrespective of the sedentary component like, so would that then increase the risk of those those conditions as well like heart disease, just through the act of worsening your eyesight? And, yeah, like, let's say we control for being sedentary and being overweight. Yeah. These are good questions. From what I've read I don't believe, just like watching TV or seeing on your computer will have a direct effect on, like causing there are some conditions of the eyes where it can be influenced by what you focus and stare at. Mhmm. But, it probably isn't gonna cause that direct effect on, like, diabetes. It will be more like, oh, well, you're sitting more because you're watching more TV and because of that your your increased likelihood of obesity and all these other things increases and so then you you can kind of see how that all is linked, but, we can talk more about, you know, devices staring at screens and and those sort of things and how that affects the eyes. That that can affect the eyes in multiple different ways too. Yeah. Yeah. It's just I was, you know, wondering because in a modern world, we are using more technology and I would imagine because of that reason, your, you know, eyes are getting more, oxidative stress and more exposure to these bright lights. And, you know, you could be otherwise fit and healthy, but because so many people are using technologies, I would imagine more people are experiencing worse eyesight because of the excessive use of technology as well. So are they increasing the risk of these chronic diseases through the eyes even though they're otherwise healthy or is it just, yeah, like the association that people who have poor eyesight usually watch too much TV and they don't also exercise and they eat too much, processed food. Yeah. So we know that, if you are somebody who stares at a screen, especially at an early age, people who use more it's not just screens but really just doing near work in general, especially for young kids who stay inside a lot of the time. They're also at a higher risk of not only of actually developing nearsightedness to a greater degree, or myopia. And that also carries risks of various high diseases, higher risk of cataracts, higher risk of glaucoma, higher risk of retinal degeneration, as well as, retinal detachments. So there are issues with that. There is a lot of research looking into how light can influence the eye and how that light can influence our brain. So we know that high energy light, or light exposure in the evening, especially blue light, you'll hear about that, affecting your sleep cycle. So we do know that there is an effect in that way, and you know very well that sleep can affect so many different parts of your body, and your mental health. And so there there's ongoing research to knowing exactly how sleep affects eye health. We're trying just starting to get some research on that. Mhmm. I don't think it's very clear, exactly to what extent, but it looks like that most of, like, light energy from devices like computer screens and things like that don't have a direct negative, like, damaging effect to the eye. Mhmm. However, there are some in vitro studies or studies done in laboratories on, like, mice with really high energy like blue lights right up and next to their eye and they can show that yes, retinal cells can have, oxidative stress and faster degeneration from that light exposure. But most devices like your phone, your computer screen, television screens don't emit that level of energy to cause that damaging effect. So, at this time we don't have any, they're they're all passing safety standards. There's nothing really claiming that it's causing this damage. So so it wouldn't be right to say, like, the technology screens and light from them is like smoking for the eyes. It's not the same degree. It's it's not the same degree. No. But, we do know that the effects of screens on other parts of the eye. So, like, we tend not to blink as much when we're staring at a computer screen. Our blink rate can either halve or go to, like, one fourth of the amount. And so if if you're not blinking as often and our eyelids tend to not blink as completely so they don't shut all the way. So your tear film is constantly being exposed to air so you have faster drying out or dry eye disease, But also with that, you have desiccation of the surface of the eye which clicks in an inflammatory cascade on the surface. And so we are seeing increased rates of, ocular surface disease, dry eye disease, even in younger individuals, even in, like, teenagers we're seeing this. So there there are some negative consequences from increased levels of screen time and and issues like that. That's that's interesting. Are there any, like, exercises or, you know, we exercise every other part of our body. Are there any exercises for the eyes that we should consider? So, like, with each there's a decline in muscle mass and muscle strength, and if you do resistance training you counteract that. Are there any, like, analogous exercises to the eyes that counteract the natural aging of the eye and the natural entropy of the eye? So there there are several different types of eye exercises that have clinical validity and most of these are used for correcting the posture of how the eyes work as a team. This is mainly for either young kids who have an eye that's turning a different direction or they're used for people who've had brain injury of some kind, right? They get in a car accident, they have a stroke, now the eye is not getting the right signals to move as a team. And so there are some eye exercises that are prescribed for that. In general as as we get older, most of the eye muscle exercises that are out there they won't strengthen the muscles necessarily, but they improve the teaming. Again, the coordination of what your brain is telling the eyes and where they need to look. The, the downside of, you know, people are often like, hey, I can improve my ability to see up close and at a young age you can do that because the muscles pull on a lens inside the eye which is flexible when you are young. But once we all hit our mid age into our forties, fifties, that lens becomes thick with age and becomes crystalline. It actually starts to become harder. And so even though the muscle inside the eye, which is a smooth muscle, called the ciliary body, even though that's moving, the lens is not able to shift and change shape anymore like it was when you were a kid. And so unfortunately a lot of the eye muscle exercises, they again aren't gonna reverse the crystalline hardening of that lens And so ultimately you're still basically most people depending on the type of glasses or refractive error as we say, most people do end up needing reading glasses or some form of bifocal or progressive or varifocal lens to to help them see better up close. Right. I still think there's there's validity to at least taking breaks from staring at devices for long periods of time, giving the eyes a rest because you kind of like how, you can get muscle cramps and your it hurts and your arm can be stuck in a position or your leg can cramp up and be stuck in a position. You can also have that with the eye muscles, we call it an accommodative spasm. And we see people who come in and they spend all day on a computer or their phone and they come in because they're having these vision issues. And all it is is they their muscles are kinda cramped up in that position, and they need to learn to relax it. Mhmm. And so I think I think everyone has, you know, experienced if they're spent majority of the day in front of a screen or looking at a computer, then, you know, the vision gets a bit blurry or they can't see in the long distance that much. It kinda reverses after a while, but, you know, initially, they might have more or at least I I sometimes get, like, more blurry vision if I've been sitting in front of a computer all day. But, yeah, I have to look at it far far away distance and eventually it kind of clears clears up. I think the best thing is just to to be aware of how much gear work you're doing to try to purposely take breaks. There are some publications implying that taking a break every twenty to twenty five minutes and taking it's not like twenty second break. That used to be a a kind of something you'll see posted online is the twenty twenty twenty rule. Every twenty minutes, take a twenty second break looking 20 feet away. That was kind of just made up, and then they actually did a formal test later and they found that, in in that formal clinical study, it really didn't do anything. So they, in fact, recommend now taking a longer break every twenty to twenty five minutes, closer to maybe three to five minutes. Mhmm. And, that just looking in the distance, giving your eyes a break, relaxing the muscle system, but also for a mental shift. Right? You're you're taking a break from your work task, getting water, using the restroom, taking a deep breath. And then when you get back to work, you're actually even more productive. So Yeah. That's generally a recommended thing. Ideally, the ideal like, what for me, an ideal scenario would be you have the screen, and then behind the screen, you have, like, a vista, like, open window Yeah. To a faraway distance. Then you so you can be in a computer, and then you can take a look outside as well. But, right now, I have, like, a wall here with the with the lighting, but in an ideal world, you know, you would have, In my previous place, I had, like, a window to the backyard and that was good, you know, to break it up the distances. Right. Yeah. Give give that a little moment of kinda going back and forth. One of the most historical ones you'll ever hear eye doctors talk about for exercise eye exercises are pencil push ups, which is basically looking at the top of a pencil or a pen and moving it closer to your nose, further back, closer to your nose, further back, and and keeping it single. That usually works even better if you have an accommodative target, meaning, like, a letter or, like, you're keeping a letter a together, because as you bring it closer, it may start to go blurry and then split apart. However, again, while that is really good for just, again, eye teaming, people can overdo it. And there are some eye scenarios, depending on how your eyes work, where people can actually make their eyes worse by doing too many types of eye exercises or or doing the wrong types of eye exercises. You can actually induce double vision or make things worse. So, I always urge caution before people start doing eye exercises without first consulting an an eye care professional. Mhmm. The, one thing that's more recent is there's some publications on blinking exercises specifically for dry eye disease. And that's basically just taking, again, breaks every like, five times a day is the most recent study. They took five breaks five times a day to basically close their eyes completely, and then do a couple sets of closing the eyes and then, like, tightening the eyes, the eyelids closed without, like, scrunching the face. Because when you scrunch the face, you you end up increasing the risk of, like, wrinkles along fine fine lines of wrinkles, you know, crow's feet along the sides of the eyes and the nose. But that's to strengthen the orbicularis oculi muscles and to improve your your blinking, processes, which, again, when people are on the screen, we tend not to blink. So that's some of the more recent publications, and I've had it showed some positive benefits. Interesting. What about massaging the eyeballs, like, squeezing them and, like, pushing? Is it is it good idea, or is it harmful? It's generally considered more of a risk, a harmful thing. The the eyeball does have its own internal pressure, which is generated by a fluid inside the eye called the aqueous humor. And if people push on the eye, you know, momentarily, the eye can handle that increase in pressure. But doing it for many times or prolonged time, it ends up causing damage to the ganglion cells or parts of the nerve that connect the eye to the brain, and that can end up in some a disease that we call glaucoma. And so it's generally considered not good to push or rub the eyes. Or if you are gonna rub the eyelids, you have to be very gentle not to, like, forcefully push on the eye. And then some people who are at risk of it, there's a condition called keratoconus where there it is associated with a high risk of rubbing the eyes. A lot of these people also have atopic issues or severe allergies. So they end up rubbing the eye and then the collagen of the cornea doesn't heal correctly and ends up weakening and protruding outward like a cone. And then they get really severe levels of irregular astigmatism. And, they have a hard time seeing, and that's a progressive disease, that oftentimes needs either severe types, or specialty types of of contact lenses or they need special surgery, sometimes even coronal transplants. So it's, again, best recommended to not rub the eyes. And if you have itchy or itchy eyes, get a cold wash rag, or something like a cool compress that feels better and and Yeah. Use artificial tears to lubricate the eyes, those sort of things. Mhmm. So maintaining the lubrication and moisture of the eye is very important? Very much so. Yeah. With with the lights, the artificial light has a lot of blue light and green light specifically, which, you know, you also alluded that it messes up the sleep rhythms and circadian rhythms. Is there what about the red light and more amber light? Is it more beneficial for the eyes? And what about these red light therapy devices? Are they beneficial for eye health? Thanks for asking that. So red light therapy, also goes by a couple different names, low level light therapy, and then if you you dig deeper into the the publications, they often use the term photobiomodulation because a lot of the devices don't just use red light anymore. They use a combination of yellow light or near infrared light as well. So the area of red light in the eyes is really fascinating. It's being tested on for dry eye therapies. It's being used as a potential treatment for myopia. It's being investigated more on East Asia for that reason. And then for macular degeneration, it probably has the most research behind it. In fact, here in The United States where I live in practice, the Volida light system was just FDA approved this January for macular degeneration. So what we know with red light is that it does help with activation of mitochondria within the cells. It also has some role on reducing inflammation and boosting antioxidant activities. And so for dry eye therapy, it is showing that, when red light is applied to the eyelids at specific wavelengths, usually somewhere between 630 to 670 nanometers of light. And there's a few studies using a near infrared light as well, but that can help boost the tear production and presumably because the red light can penetrate and get to the lacrimal gland, but also because it can help stabilize the lipid layers of the tear film. And you have these oil glands in your eyelids called meibomian glands. And And so when you get red light treatment, there can be some heat benefits, but it also is helping the cells within those glands, basically heal and produce better. And so those oils sit on your tear film and prevent it from evaporating. And so there is some good publications about use of that type of therapy for dry eye. For myopia, for nearsightedness for children, again, these this is probably an area that I think the industry is very cautious about because you're putting red light or this intense red light into children's eyes and we're worried about the long term effects. Right? Short term studies going one to two years right now largely show good safety, results, but we just don't know what the what's gonna happen twenty, thirty years down the road. And there are some devices which have also been tested independently and found to breach safety levels because if you're shining a bright light if if if anybody who's watching, listening, like, a lot of red light devices that are sold just on the Internet also come with goggles or they give you a warning, like, do wear protective eyewear. And part of that can be because if you have too much energy, it's not just the wavelength, but if you have too much energy of the light and it reaches the back of the eye, it could cause photochemical or even thermal damage to the retina. Mhmm. And so there is a lot of safety precautions, I think, in the research right now about, like, hey, how do we how do we design a research study and how do we make a device that we know is gonna be safe but also reach therapeutic levels? Mhmm. And then the area right now, which, again, because of the new Valida system being FDA approved, that's really fascinating because this is showing a mixture, again, of yellow light, red light, and near infrared light can not only slow down the development of age related macular degeneration, but also restore some usable eyesight. And we've never had a treatment like that where it wasn't an invasive procedure because other treatments from macular degeneration are like using an injection, of a medication inside the eye, which nobody wants. Vitamin supplementation has been shown from macular degeneration to slow down the disease, but not reverse it or improve your eyesight, where this is the first time we have a technology again. I believe over fifty percent of people in the phase three clinical trial had at least one line of improvement in their vision. Right? That's taking somebody from not being able to drive to being able to drive in some scenarios. About twenty five percent of people in that study also had two lines of improvement or about ten percent of people had, like, a full I think it was around nine, but nine percent of people had a full three lines of improvement, which is just outstanding in the eye care world. So, it's it's really exciting right now. I don't think it's on the market yet. So eye clinics probably aren't offering it in The United States, but it has been available in some places in Europe and and and South America as well for the last several years. So these at home red light panels, like, I have one here. Mhmm. These, you know, very mostly for the whole body, are can you, like, use them for the eyes as well? The not obviously, you probably don't wanna look directly into them, but, let's say, glance away through through the side or before further away, like, few meters away. Are they do would they have any, you know, help benefits to the eye? I think they they could. Again, a lot of it has to do with the amount of energy that's coming from it. So it depends on how far away you are from the device. It depends on the fluence or the power density of those devices. And so, we have devices in the eye clinics that are much higher energy doses. And so usually, it takes twenty minutes of a treatment, for example, where a lot of the at home devices, they may not be effective. You essentially would have to be under it for, like, six hours to get the same dosage. But I've also seen a few eye devices now on the market, which I they don't have this is the tough thing I have is that they don't have necessary clinical studies to show its safety or efficacy of a lot of the at home devices. Right. And some of these devices, it's like, hey, I have two of them that I've been testing out, and they're specifically marketed for the eyes. You keep your eyes closed, but you basically do it for three minutes at a time. And I'm doing it, and I still am trying to figure out exactly where in the research where is the safety limit. Mhmm. I believe these devices are safe, but I don't know if they're clinically effective yet. Mhmm. And so for myself, I'm sort of just sort of trusting some of these, the the researchers and other doctors I know who have done the research, but I haven't seen any true clinical data of these devices yet. So I I'm I think the I give lectures on this topic, but I I the profession is still very cautious about we don't wanna cause damage to someone's eyes. Right? So we're we're being ultra cautious about it. So the at home devices, if someone has one like yourself, if it says wear eye goggles, I would still wear eye goggles. Mhmm. And I wouldn't look directly into the light. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Like Until we have more information. More, yeah, like, kind of indirectly. If it reaches the eye in some point, you're further away, then it's probably not gonna be, like, harmful, but, don't, like, sit in front of it and because you do sometimes, you know, I use it mostly for the face and the chest. So I'm sitting in front of it, but I wouldn't wanna, like, open my eyes and look into the the light. Yeah. Certainly not for very long. There it's interesting because even, like, for the clinical trials for the Valida system for macular degeneration, they have three cycles or or where basically you have your eyes open where some forms of light, like yellow light and some near infrared light enters the eye with the eyes open. But then there's another cycle where they have you close your eyes and use a higher energy dosage of red light while your eyes closed. And I would love to get some of the p h time to talk with some of the PhD researchers who are doing this because I wanna know why and how what other studies do they do to determine the clinical safety and efficacy of the eyes closed versus eyes open versus certain wavelengths? I honestly just don't know that information off the top of my head. I haven't found I don't know if companies are just purposely keeping it secret or if it's just really that hard to find, or maybe they don't know either. Mhmm. I think there's also a lot of curiosities and questions around, again, eye safety and and protocols that we just haven't established yet. Yeah. Well, it's gonna be interesting to see what what it's gonna look like in a few few years. But with sunlight, you know, you're getting, the full spectrum light from the sun. And I don't think you wanna look directly into the sun either, although some people might disagree about that. So, yeah. So how how about sunlight? Is there any time of the day that is more beneficial for the eyes? And, yeah, well, how do you go about, you know, where where should you look? Yeah. So this is this is something I've personally been more interested in. I haven't been haven't been able to find, like, solid research to explain, like because I think there's so many variables. Right? Time of day, the latitude, longitude where you live on on the planet. We know that UV light is gonna be most potent later in the day, but also just if it's midday and you stare at the sun, the amount of energy you're getting from the sun can easily burn a hole in the retina in the back of the eye. We call it solar retinopathy. And I don't wish that on anybody because usually once that tissue is gone, it is gone. It's not gonna come back. And so people end up with permanent holes in their vision from it. Early in the day, if the sun is just rising or if it's setting at the end of the day, then less energy is going directly to the eye. A lot of the sun's light is in fact being bent by the atmosphere and so in some way the energy is being filtered. It also tends to look more like a red light. So, a red orange hue. Right? And so there are some thoughts that perhaps that form of light is better for waking the body up, shutting down the melatonin processes, make me feel more awake. There might be some, you know, cellular benefits to it, but, I don't know of any safety true published published articles on on, like, what's safe and what's not. Best though, I would say not to directly eyes open stare into the sun at any point. And then, yeah, hopefully, as as I'm able to dig more into research, I'm actually looking at this for to answer this question at a I'm giving a lecture at the American Optometric Association in a few months. So I'm I'm currently digging into it, but I still haven't found, like, direct answers. Mhmm. Yeah. It's very interesting. You know, this the sun gazers who, do blame things about looking directly into the eye into the sun, but, yes, very interesting that it's obviously too much bright light, certainly will damage the eyes and a lot of Yeah. Cases of that. There might be a sliver of truth to it just because of, like, what we're discovering with things like red light. However, we also know that there's increased risks of other conditions, whether it be solar retinopathy, UV light exposure over the length of your time, we know is increased risk of various, not only cataracts, but potentially macular degeneration as well. Mhmm. So it's I think it's there's a lot of curiosities about it, but there's also variability of where you live, what time of the day. You know, again, there's all those factors. Yeah. So probably early and, late sun exposure, so after the sunrise and before the sunset, is more safer for the eyes and you get more of this red light that might have some, you know, therapeutic benefits potentially. But the midday sun is very bright and Mhmm. More damaging to the eyes. A 100%. Right. As should you like would it be better to wear sunglasses during the daytime or or not? Yeah. Definitely. So UV light. And so sunglasses, you know, assuming you're getting good sunglasses, there are some really poorly made ones out there that maybe don't have full UV light protection. But, we know that UV light doesn't just cause damage to the eye like internally. Again, there's several studies that have shown an association of UV light exposure and risk of developing macular degeneration, which is a blinding eye disease. It accounts for a lot of vision loss for people over the age of 50. The, UV light also increases some risk of cataract development, But then UV light also damages the surface of the eye and the eyelids. A a lot of people because the eyelids are one of the thinnest skin on the body. They we have a lot of patients who end up with various melanomas, or sebaceous cell issues on the eyelids and UV light directly impacts that. And a lot of people when they put on sunscreen or sunblock, they avoid putting it in the eyes. I mean, they you don't want it in the eyes. It even says warning, don't get in the eyes. So sunglasses have that benefit of protecting the ocular surface and the eyelids. Mhmm. And then we also see changes to healing rates of the cornea from UV light. Also, you can have other eye diseases that come from UV light exposure on the surface of the eye like pterygium and pinguecula are commonly seen. These are like scar formations that or a callus formation that grows on the surface of the eye. If anyone's been around, like more mid equator locations around the world, people will develop what's called surfer's eye Mhmm. Which is just a a more of a layman's term for pterygium, which is again a a growth of tissue that starts to cover the eye and that's largely due to environmental exposure of UV light as well as like high salt water content areas. Surf against surfer's eye because a lot of surfers don't wear goggles and then they're not wearing sunglasses either. And so they end up developing this growth in the eye, which essentially is the eye trying to protect itself from all this harsh damage. Interesting. With the sea, the sun reflects a lot of the light from the sea. So you actually often, you know, from the water surface, you get a lot of even brighter light Mhmm. Without even actually looking directly in the sun. So is I would imagine that also is just harmful, the reflective surfaces from, I don't know, car windows or windows, glass buildings in general as well as, the sea. A 100%. Yeah. So, reflective surfaces, the things like UV light will bounce off those reflective surfaces. And the we have other epidemiological studies showing that people who are, like, fishermen throughout their lives, there are risks of not only skin diseases, like skin cancers, but also eye diseases, macular degeneration, cataracts, etcetera, also dramatically increase just from that double dose of light exposure. Mhmm. Yeah. Let's talk about nutrition then. So nutrition can increase the risk of many chronic diseases. Mhmm. Are there any foods that are uniquely beneficial to the eyes? For sure. I love I love that you asked about this, and I've seen some, some of other videos where you've talked about it. So for the eyes, the biggest thing is basically vegetables and green leafy vegetables as well as oily fish and, various omegas. From a purely dietary standpoint, you know, again, the retina on the back of the eye is highly metabolic tissue and, there's some unique components to it. When it comes to, like, oily fish, I'll first mention, the omega threes, the the photoreceptors in the back of the eye, over 60% of their lipids are all DHA omega three. So that's really important to be getting in your diet. The other part, with vegetable sources is mainly carotenoids. We know that vitamin a is important for the phototransduction process of actually receiving light and getting the information sent to the brain. Most people are not vitamin a deficient, you know, unless somebody's just, not getting proper calories to begin with. But there is lutein and zeaxanthin. Have you have you read much on on lutein, zeaxanthin? Yeah. You have, become a fan Yeah. Recently, and, yeah, they're very you know, carotenoids, in general are very good for the brain and the eyes. Yes. So I'm glad that you mentioned the brain as well. But, for the eyes, if if any viewers, listeners haven't heard of this, so lutein and zeaxanthin, these, are carotenoids. They're fat soluble. They're mainly found in green leafy vegetables. You can find them a little bit in some of the egg yolk of eggs. It's really not a high concentration in eggs, but it is there. These carotenoids, they go to the eye and they deposit in high concentrations within the retina and the eye, specifically in the macular area, which is like the bull's eye of where your sharpest vision is, your color vision, all comes from this area where it gets highly deposited. And they kinda have three functions in the eye. They work as, first, a filter for high energy light, namely blue light. Mhmm. So, people who have higher amounts of these, carotenoids in the eye, we can measure it through some testing called macular pigment optical density. And people who have higher serum levels of lutein have been shown to have about a thirty to forty percent decreased incidence of developing macular degeneration, especially severe levels of it. But then also it has outside of just the blue light protection, it also has a strong antioxidant capability and a strong anti inflammatory, capability, which again is really important for the retinal structures. And like you kind of mentioned, there is also clinical evidence that's good for the brain, good for memory even for older adults, good for children and their memory formation, visual processing speed. It also has reduced glare issues for eyesight and improved contrast ability. So a lot of professional athletes are in fact given supplements of lutein and zeaxanthin. And then, one of my friends, doctor John Nolan, he, he does a lot of research in these carotenoids. Just last year, they published, research finding that supplementation of these carotenoids also helps reduce the oxidation of low density lipoproteins, and others, various cytokines that are associated with atherosclerosis. So there there's a lot of benefits to these, to these carotenoids. And people can eat that and diet or they can take supplements for it. Yeah. And then, again, back to omega threes. There's a lot of research showing that people who just consume more fish, at least oily fish twice twice a week, that they have reduced risks of macular degeneration, reduced risks of diabetic retinopathy, and and various other conditions, even some benefit for dry eye. But, primarily for the retina in the back of the eye, it's DHA. And unfortunately, most of the supplements for omega threes, whether it be fish oil based or or whatnot, generally are more of a triglyceride form and have higher EPA. And your body may not absorb the right amount of DHA to get into the retinal tissues because there's a specific isoform of DHA that they're starting to investigate that your brain has a high specificity for. There's a transporter called MFS D2A that your your basically allows for a certain type of DHA to get into the blood brain barrier and into the blood retinal barrier or get through it. And so, it's largely recommended in the eye care space to eat a Mediterranean diet that has a lot of green leafy vegetables and oily fish. And then if you're gonna supplement, there is some benefit to if you're not eating oily fish, just taking supplements of omega threes. And then, again, lutein zeaxanthin, if you're somebody who either can't digest or eat vegetables or if you, if you just know that you don't eat that much, then that's an option. Yeah. Yeah. These lutein and zeaxanthin are quite interesting that they're from a dietary perspective has been seem to be associated with reduced, macular degeneration, and there's also the studies or these clinical trials show that, they help with markers of eye health. So they, you know, have actually little evidence that they work and, you know, it's relatively easy to take take a supplement and, you know, preserve your, eye health as a as a as, you know, naturally, it will decline with age. Yeah. And so, again, it's something I try to talk about with as many patients as I can just about, like, being more preventative. It's we we we know that once somebody develops a condition like macular degeneration, for example, giving supplementations of lutein, zeaxanthin along with some other supplements of vitamin c, vitamin e, some zinc, that that can slow down that condition by about twenty five percent over five years of taking that supplement, but it won't stop it. It doesn't reverse it. Right. But if we can take these supplements or we can eat really well, we can reduce our risk of ever even developing it by up to about forty percent. So and that's that's a really important thing. Yeah. With carotenoids, there's another one, astaxanthin, that is, you know, shown to be beneficial for eyes and protecting against UV damage in the skin, photoaging in the skin. Does it have any evidence for, like, eye health because it's also like a carotenoid? Yeah. There is some evidence that it may be beneficial for the eyes. There's a few clinical studies on on even, like, eye strain and being beneficial there. There's a there's a several studies more, I would say, in vitro studies on its effect on helping retinal health. There's not too much on on human clinical trials at this point, but it it is something that's being investigated more now. The only thing I'll I'll kind of tee off to people is know that astaxanthin is a competitor against lutein and zeaxanthin. So you don't wanna take them at the same time. If you if if I was gonna design a a formulation myself, I'd probably have, you know, take lutein or something in the morning, and then you take astaxanthin in your supplement later in the day. Mhmm. Just because, again, they they're competing against each other. What if you take, like, a larger dose? Would you overcome the competition? I'm not I'm not too sure. That's a good question for, like, a a chemist, or somebody who knows that biochemistry better than I do. Okay. But that's a good question. Yeah. Because I I take, you know, them in the morning usually, but I take pretty large doses. I take, like, the maximum efficacious dose that I've found, for both of them. So, yeah, will be interesting to see. I used to take them both at the same time, and then I I spoke with, one of the PhD medical, the one of the top advisers for one of the supplement companies in the eye care space. And, you know, he he knows, like, every single publication off the top of his head, and then he broke down to me how that works. And I was like like, oh my gosh. Okay. So I need to change things a little bit. But it is rather interesting. Yeah. With supplements, there's another one, creatine that, you know, is known for muscle, and now it's more commonly known as a brain supplement as well. And you mentioned that the eye uses a lot of energy. It's, you know, one of the most energy consuming organs or tissues in the body with, and creatin helps with the ATP production and energy production. I I don't know if there are studies about this, but would creatine then help with eye health or eye function in some way? I love that you asked this. I've had several people ask me this too. I personally take creatine, but more from a physical standpoint, but also I've seen some of the publications on on, like, mental health. And I I've noticed a positive benefit over the last several years as I started taking it. It's hard for me to say, is it truly because of the creatine or is it because I'm also getting more exercise, and getting a better sleep? Is that causing a better mental health shift? But, I've looked into creatine and its effect on the eyes, and I can't really find much studies on it. It might just be something nobody's really researched. And, I don't know. If anybody who's watching or listening, and they want to invest in a clinical study, reach out to me because I'll I'll be happy to see if I can put together a study like that. But that that would be a really interesting and fascinating thing to look into. Yeah. You know, I think it's pretty new topic, given that the brain component has only recently become more popular. Quick Google search. There is a in vitro study that creatine is neuroprotective in retinal neurons, but, nothing else yet. Yeah. I'll have to look at that too. The last time I did really did a deep dive into it was maybe, like, last summer. Mhmm. So maybe something's come out, and I just haven't seen it yet. Yeah. But, there is other nutrients and other, other studies looking at things like, various, what would be, like, curcuminoids as being beneficial for retinal health. There is some research into various, like, niacin, elements that are really good for glaucoma, and they're still in clinical trials right now trying to figure out exactly who is this gonna be beneficial for, how much. But I still largely just recommend people eat a whole food diet that's along the lines of somewhere on Mediterranean diet. That's where the most research is around eye health. But, as far as those other supplements, there's still Yeah. While there's evidence that they're supportive for retinal health and and nerve health, there there we still just don't have really strong clinical recommendations yet. Mhmm. Yeah. With vitamin a, there is the difference between retinol that you get mostly from liver and beta carotene that you get from sweet potatoes and carrots and those things. And your carrots are usually said to be good for the eyes because of containing vitamin a. Is there a difference for eye health between this retinol, which is considered the bioactive vitamin a, and, vitamin a from carrots and sweet potatoes? Yeah. So, beta carotene your body will take and will turn into, like, true vitamin a, either in your liver or through, intestines. Mhmm. But the the their eye is gonna use the whole vitamin a form. The concern about people who you know, again, most people are not vitamin a deficient. Mhmm. Your body stores vitamin a pretty well either in the liver and even in the adipose tissue. The big concern is some people take vitamins a supplements. Like, right now, there's kind of some talk about vitamin a supplementation. And the concern is that if you it's possible to take too much. You can have hypervitaminosis of vitamin a, and that can have negative effects on the eyes. There are case reports of I've even seen one of, a young girl who is taking vitamin a supplements and she ended up having a swelling of her optic nerve and that was mainly due to increased levels of cerebral spinal fluid as a as a as an effect of taking too much vitamin a. And thankfully in her case, she discontinued the vitamin a and then things improved, but there there are concerns about that. Mhmm. So most people, though, if they're eating plenty of, plenty of calories, usually, they're not vitamin a deficient. Right. But, that it is a concern certainly in some places around the world. What about sugar and more processed foods? Yeah. That's that's a good question. So, we know several studies have looked at ultra processed foods in relationship to eye disease, and they they have found that, yes, there is a relationship. People who eat more ultra processed food usually are getting more sugar. They're also getting higher levels of, you know, different types of fats in their diet. They usually usually are individuals who are more sedentary and so you see this compounding fact higher risk of obesity, higher rates of inflammatory diseases and that also ends up with higher risk for various diseases. We do see increased risk of glaucoma, diabetes, macular degeneration, and these are potentially site threatening diseases. So it is generally it is it is kind of all about the same kind of discussion. You wanna eat healthier, wanna be more active, take better care of yourself. Yeah. Is it is it, you know, because there's a difference between eating sugar and having diabetes, which is, you know, characterized by chronically high blood sugar levels. Yeah. If you eat sugar, then, you know, your blood sugar will rise. If you're healthy, then it's gonna come back down, to normal after a while. But if you're yet diabetic, then it's gonna be chronically elevated. So is it the chronic ex chronically elevated blood sugar that, you know, damages the eyes and leads to vision loss similar that it leads to, you know, amputation of the arms eventually or neuropathy in the fingers, or even like just a mere act of elevation in blood sugar, which happens, you know, normally whenever you eat with just a normal blood sugar elevation, would that also damage the eyes at a faster rate? Yeah. So, obviously, if if somebody's not diabetic, then their body will respond correctly and at a faster rate of maintaining adequate blood sugar levels. The problem with people with with diabetes and what happens pathophysiologically with the eye is if there is elevated levels of blood glucose. Inside the lumen of the arterials inside the retina, there and there's a what's beautiful is the retina has a dual blood supply. You have blood vessels in the back of the eye, which supply blood nutrients to the eye, but also have blood vessels that go into the retina. And when you have elevated blood sugar levels, there's a cell called a pericyte. Not a parasite like a microorganism, but it's called a pericyte. And these pericytes allow for reaction of how the blood vessels constrict and how they allow fluid, and nutrients to pass through the lumen. The but with elevated high levels of blood sugar, the sugar molecules basically pass through and get into the pericet, which causes them to swell because it also brings in fluid because it wants to have that right the correct osmosis gradient. Mhmm. So the parasites swell, and they eventually die. And if if you lose a lot of these pericites over time, then the blood vessels can't constrict and regulate themselves. And then in the eye, clinically, what we end up seeing is, we can actually do some functional tests through what's called ERGs, electroretinograms, and we can see decreased function of the retinal cells, so they're just metabolically not healthy. And then the first clinical sign that we can like me looking inside somebody's eye who's diabetic, I can see is usually small outpouching or aneurysms of the blood vessels, because the blood vessel wall is now weak and so they start to kind of have this balloon outpouching. And eventually, they start to break and then we see bleeding inside the eye where there's either blood accumulation, we can even see fat deposits or what we call exudates that build up inside the eye. The severe consequences is not only ischemia. Right? There's blood not getting to where it needs to be, so then now there's, ox lack of oxygen getting to the right tissues, so then you start having death of retinal cells and ganglion cells. And then new blood vessels can start to form inside the eye because there's this ischemia, the cells are dying, they start releasing these markers, called VEGF or vasoendothelial growth factors factors that signal for these new blood vessels to grow inside the eye to, like, hey, I need I need nutrients, bring those blood vessels over here. But the new blood vessels are very weak and they're fragile, and so they either bleed more or leak more fluid inside the eye or they can start to, cause scarring. It is basically, the the new fluid that's leaking into the eye start contracting and you have scar formation inside the eye, which leads to retinal detachments. And and then you can also have increased problems of glaucoma. There there's a lot of things that happen with diabetes. So it is important, for people who are at risk of diabetes, if you're prediabetic or already have it, to not only, do everything you can in your lifestyle, change your diet, exercise, take medication, lose weight to try and put it into remission if possible, but definitely see an eye care provider at least every year too so that we can check and see what's going on with the eye, because we do have treatments to, stop a lot of these these conditions. Yeah. I think I heard that when you are diagnosed with diabetes, then you get, mandatory, like, a eye exam or some checkup. It's it is considered the a mandatory recommendation now. I've unfortunately, yesterday, I had a patient who he even admitted. He's been neglecting taking care of himself once he was diagnosed. He never came in for an eye exam. He just came in yesterday because over the weekend he's had a sudden loss of vision in his right eye Wow. And that scared him. So he came in and unfortunately he is in a severe proliferative stage where new blood vessels are leaking inside the eye. And one of his blood vessels leaked open, and now he's got large hemorrhaging inside the eye and he can't see through it. Oh, wow. So, in his case, he knew he knew he was neglecting it, and, I felt for him. But, thankfully, he came in so we can get him help, and, hopefully, he's on a better track going forward. Yeah. Let's talk about, glasses. So, usually, I I don't know. Maybe my, like, impression, but usually people don't want to wear glasses or they're kind of, you know, hesitant to start using them. When it comes to deteriorating eye health, is it healthier to start wearing eyeglasses when you're let's say your vision has slightly declined, or would it be fine to, like, continue without the glasses even though your vision is, I don't know, like, let's say 10 worse than it was before. Is there so I guess the question is is there any is the progression is the decline in your vision faster if you don't use glasses once you've had already some decline in your eye health, or, is it fine? So Yeah. Yeah. This is another interesting question. I think a lot of it depends on your age. For example, if you Right. If you're a parent if a parent's listening to this, kids, their brain is still developing. And there's also as as kids go through their adolescence and they start going through their growth spurts, the eye is also still growing with the body. And so it is, in fact, beneficial for kids who are nearsighted, for example, to get glasses, to get contact lenses, something to correct their vision, not only so that they see their best so their performance at school is good, but also because there are at least two studies showing that, kids who wear correction, in fact, slows down their myopia or their advancement or their need for glasses getting worse. It actually slows it down where kids who don't wear glasses at that same age, advance faster at a faster rate. The there are a lot of there's I'll put in there's a lot of nuance when it comes to myopia specifically. The other component to it is just you want at a young age for young kids to have proper brain development to appreciate sharp vision. And so it's also really important to to have kids wearing correction and full correction, for proper brain development. Otherwise, your brain can choose to not develop good, cells to appreciate good vision. We call that amblyopia or some kids, you'll hear the term lazy eye. That can happen. As an adult, like, you and I, if if we choose not to wear glasses, it's unlikely to progress faster or worsen if we choose not to wear them, because most of the eye's anatomy is kind of set at this point. But, like, after the age of 25, usually things come to a slow crawl. It doesn't really change much in terms of your glasses power, things like that. There is a small ten percent of the population who can continue to advance, but most of it is just quality of life. Like, if you're gonna see better with glasses or contacts, why would you not wanna see better? It's not necessarily gonna make things worse. There is this perception, I think, for a lot of people that, oh, well, I I saw, you know, things were a little fuzzy, but I started wearing glasses. The glasses help, but now they take the glasses off, everything is so much worse. Mhmm. It's it's not that your eyes actually got worse. It's that the perception, your comparative difference between with and without glasses became much more noticeable. Mhmm. And so it's, again, it's just not a physiological change with the eye. It's more of a mental appreciation of perception. Yeah. When I was a kid, then, my parents and the others told me that don't look through the glasses, you know, these other glasses because you'll actually get worse eyesight because of that. If you use, let's say, your grandma's glasses Mhmm. And they're super blurry. Right? But, that will actually make your own eyes worse. There there might be some truth to that. Certainly, if if you're wearing somebody else's glasses, you're wearing the wrong power, you could end up forcing your eye muscles to work harder than they need to be. Mhmm. And then that can, it changes the posture of your eyes and how you use those muscles. But more so is we do know that the way older glasses lenses have been designed, there is a phenomenon where light is focused in the peripheral retina and that sends a what's called a hyperopic defocus. And it somehow communicates to the brain and the eye to make the eyeball grow longer. And so it's not fully understood and it's only one part of the equation of myopia development, but that's why now you'll see new glasses lenses made for kids as well as some contact lenses that are designed to eliminate this, kind of distortion caused by glasses, which with the new designs can slow down the rate of myopia development by up to, like, fifty percent. So, depending on where you live and where those devices are available, like in The United States, the glasses aren't available yet because they're still going through trials. But, in some other places like in Canada and and in Europe, those those lenses have been available for some time and they can help slow down myopia for children. Interesting. Are there any health differences between contact lenses and glasses? Oh, yeah. Another good question. So the big issue with contact lenses is just the risk of infection. Especially for people who sleep in contact lenses, the risk of infection is dramatically much higher. Contact lenses also dry out. They they absorb the tears and then the tears evaporate much faster. So, there is higher rates of dry eye and contact lens awareness and irritation. There is some evidence that contact lenses, if worn for long periods of time and depending on the type of lens you wear, can also push on the cornea of the eye and cause some desensitization of the nerves in the cornea, which may alter your, body's ability to regulate tear production and may cause problems with neurotrophic or, what's called neurotrophic keratitis. So there are cases where that's happened. I think in general, most people consider contact lenses pretty safe as long as you have good hygiene habits and you don't sleep in the contact lenses. Gotcha. But there is concern amongst some professionals in the space about contact lens wear at all just because there is an increased risk of dry eye and and long term consequences of dry eye later in life. What about LASIK surgery? I think that's a very popular question. Is it I guess, is it is it obviously not permanent or is it? Yeah. So the the with the LASIK procedure specifically, like, they're removing tissue from your eye, and that tissue is gone forever. So it is that that part of the procedure where, yeah, LASIK is is permanent, but your vision still will change as you get older. Mhmm. Especially in your forties and above that, again, the lens inside the eye is getting bigger and it starts to crystallize. And as it crystallizes, the light bends differently through that lens inside the eye and so your prescription and need for glasses can start to shift and change. And so that's that's kind of the harsh truth of LASIK. It is considered largely safe. I know you'll people will see stuff on the Internet about some people have unfortunately committed suicide after LASIK, and part a lot of that comes from just poor healing circumstances as well as dry eye. LASIK surgery specifically does sever more nerves on the surface of the eye during that procedure, which then they have to grow back. In most cases, like ninety nine percent of cases, people heal great. They do get some dry eye afterward and the dry eye usually resolves within three to six months. Mhmm. But for some people, if the nerves don't grow back correctly or if they already had preexisting dry eye before the surgery, their symptoms of dryness, pain, can be detrimental. And it can cause foggy vision, blurred vision, glare, halos. But then, you know, those unfortunate few and it's usually less than one percent that's quoted. There's people who have severe issues because of that. And those are the people who have the worst outcomes are always the people who speak the loudest. Mhmm. Yeah. But the vast majority of people I've I've ever worked with that have had LASIK usually come back saying they loved it. It changed their life. They would do it again in a heartbeat. So, thankfully, the clinical trials do show it is still safe. I think just as a profession, we need to be very diligent about who is at risk and who has more dry eye issues before we send them for surgery. Yeah. Gotcha. Last year, there was this video by mister Beast where he paid for, surgeries for these blind people, and they were able to see. I don't know what, you know, type of surgery it was specifically, but is it possible to cure blindness with some surgery? Yeah. So that because mister Beast did specifically with cataracts. Mhmm. And cataracts are the number one you know, globally, if you look at what's the number one cause of vision loss in the world, it is cataracts. The nice thing is that so what a cataract is, if for people who don't know, like I've been saying, in your forties and in your fifties and above that, the lens inside the eye starts to crystallize. When you're still that young, usually the lens is still clear. Like, it's a clear lens inside the eye just like your glasses lenses are clear. But as as you continue to get older, that lens oxidizes and begins to turn a yellow color and eventually even a white or in some cases even a dark brown color. So I've seen I've done mission trips in some parts of the world and you'll see people who are in their eighties and have never had cataract surgery. And these lenses inside their eye are very large, like a marble, and they'll be like coffee brown. They can't see through them. So cataract surgery, they can go in and they use a tool called phacoemulsification. That's that's a fun word for the day, but it uses ultrasound to shatter this lens inside the eye. It's like shattering a glass marble into dust particles. They then vacuum out the particles and then they put a new plastic lens implant inside of the eye, which they measure and account for any need for glasses and try to put that in the implant. So afterward, you see through a clear lens again. And in many cases, people, don't need to rely on glasses as much. It's kinda like getting LASIK at the same time almost. Wow. So thankfully, we have that surgery. It only takes, like, ten, fifteen minutes to do. Wow. It's considered one of the most successful surgeries that that have been invented. Mhmm. The downside is in some parts of the world, people don't have access to health care or eye care, and, vision loss is is a consequence of that. Mhmm. That's very interesting. Yeah. In the future, would be would we be able to have a type of surgery or, like, I don't know, like, implant of the eye, like a Cyborg eye or something like that that would, you know, you know, give you perfect eyesight or but as well as maybe enhance it, like able to zoom in or something like that because, you know, humans, our eyes are, you know, pretty good. We are pretty visual, like our visual system is pretty good, but it's obviously not as good as, like, eagles or hawks or something like that. Could be, like, use some sort of cyber eyes or other ways to enhance our vision. I know there's talks of that. I know there there's companies who have been kind of working on that in terms of an implant for cataract surgery, specifically. I think they do run into some just barriers of technology at this point. Like, if they do have that capability to zoom in, it would need some sort of, electrical charge or it would need some sort of mechanical movement of the lens inside the eye. And that means it would probably need some sort of battery capacitor and then how do you charge that through the eye, you know, you probably have to fall asleep wearing some sort of charging goggles that gives, you know, electromagnetic field that charges it. And then how long do those last? What happens if they break? You know, there's Yeah. There's a lot of, I think, just technological things that need to happen. So we're probably you know, who knows how things would go with AI, but, we're probably forty, fifty years away from something like that. Mhmm. I know there there are some contact lens companies building augmented reality contact lenses, and same thing for augmented reality glasses. And I think that is very much within the grasp of, not only some augmented reality glasses that exist right now, but in the next ten years, we'll see improved adoption of that technology. And so I think that's that's gonna be very real to the point where, even if you don't need glasses to see better, you will have a thin normal pair of looking eyewear that will have a digital screen basically in front of your eyes that you'll be able to see not only text messages and email notifications. But as you look around the room, it'll highlight, you know, food in your fridge and tell you what type of recipes you can do by mixing these various ingredients. You'll be able to drive down the road, and it'll tell you, hey, take a left, take a right. Here's your speed. Just heads up display like a video game almost. Mhmm. And that may be able to also magnify things in the distance and make it zoomed up in front of your natural eye. I think, I think that will have a lot of applications. Mhmm. And I think that is more realistic again within the next probably five to ten years. Wow. Yeah. It, like, feels that, with the eyes, we will be able to reach this point in technology where we are able to pretty much cure all blindness and cure all eye eye diseases. At least, you know, that's my impression because if we can already, you know, do these surgeries, ten minute surgeries to cure people from, this blindness from cataracts, then, yeah, in a few decades, we'll you know, I think that's why the way it looks like it is gonna be hitting Gosh. I I hope so. You know, we have the so just about two years ago, we had the very first full total eye transplant that was, accomplished. The eye didn't work, but the eye is a very special has its own specialized immune system. And so and then connecting the eyeball to back to a new person's head, connecting it to their optic nerve. And so the so the eye to not only not deteriorate and not be rejected is a huge deal. But then for this person, they they can measure and see that there's electrical input going from the eye, this donor eye to the the recipient's brain, but the recipient, doesn't have functional vision from it. But just the accomplishment of, hey, we actually got an eye and a technique to get the eye to connect to the body and not be rejected, that is a huge feat in its own. Obviously, we have a long ways to go from there, but, that was a pretty big landmark news in the field of eye care that just happened. Yeah. That's very interesting. Before we wrap up, is there anything, you know, specific or special that we didn't cover that people should know about, improving their eye health? Is it something they should do or avoid or something like that? You know, my high kind of eye health routine is not only just getting an eye exam every year. I also eat really healthy as we've been talking about. I try to take some supplements for my eye and vision health. I'm experimenting with red light right now. We still don't have full kind of months about it. Sunglasses, you know, we touched on that. I think that's important. And then just taking breaks. Yeah. And especially for young kids being aware that spending a lot of time on your devices, while we we want our kids to have good education, we do need them to try to spend more time outside. There's some sort of, communication to the eye and the brain that we don't fully understand yet, but we know that kids who spend, you know, around an hour and a half to two hours outside, it has a sort of balancing effect where it negates, a lot of the drives for nearsightedness development than than than not. So I do encourage for, families that come in to the clinic, I advise them, and I'll try to encourage more outdoor time. Interesting. Yeah. So it's been great to to have this discussion and, yeah, eyes are super underrated and very important for quality of life. Before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and your work? So thank you. Yeah. So, of course, my kind of my mission with all of my education online is through the Doctor Eye Health YouTube channel. I provide education on various things whether it be glasses, contacts, surgeries, a lot of disease education, things that you can do with your lifestyle. I also post on other channels again under the Doctor Eye Health name. So for anybody who's curious about eyes, learn about more, definitely check us out those channels and reach out to me through there. Yeah. We'll put the links in the show notes. And, my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you adopted sooner? Sleep. My my number one habit, I think I've neglected most of my life is I just never respected my sleep. You know, certainly growing up, I I stayed up late nights till three in the morning playing video games. Mhmm. And my my academics in high school and even some in college, I think, would have been way better. I I was a good student, but, I think my performance in in so many different ways, physical, mental, academic would have been improved tenfold if I just would have had regular consistent sleep. And, when I went to optometry school, I think that was my superpower because I prioritized it. And unfortunately, when you get into, like, things like residency for health care, they do not care about your sleep. Mhmm. So I think I I lost a lot of my regular sleep habits, as I get I guess I got older, passed optometry school. And now I'm trying to prioritize it a lot again. Yeah. And it definitely affects my physical fitness. It affects my mood. It affects my mental capacity, my productivity. So it is something I'm I'm trying my best to prioritize. Yeah. That's a very important tip and very common common one. Well, yeah, thanks for coming to the podcast, and it was a great to talk with you. Yeah. Thank you. I appreciate it. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.