You know, your body will always adapt to what you give it. And if you're always, you know, pampering and, cozy, then your body will be non resilient and very weak and not able to tolerate any kind of a stress. There seems to be this this curve that where there's a sweet spot and the sweet spot seems to be Oli, welcome back to the show. Hey. Thanks, Sim. I I don't even remember how many years. It's it's, maybe four or five years since the last time. Well, yeah, I mean, we've had like a lot of these live streams, on, your channel, on the BioAccresenter channel, or the Hololive's channel. And, yeah, but glad to have you back on my show. And, you know, you've also recently published a new book called the resilient being about resilience. And, you know, I'm also one of the co authors on that, contributor. So, yeah, I'm excited to talk with you about all things related to physical resilience and, health, etcetera. And I recently actually had a tweet tweet as well on X, where I said that, you know, health is not like just being free from sickness and free from disease. It's also the aspect of being resilient because, you know, you could live in a bubble, literally speaking, all your life, but you get exposed to some sort of a minor pathogen, then are you really healthy? Whereas being healthy is actually also being able to be exposed to certain toxins and certain pathogens without getting sick. And if you do get sick, you're recovering from them, a lot faster than the average person would. So I think, yeah, like, resilience is a central component of being healthy and is also very involved in, like, all the longevity mechanisms and longevity pathways. They actually overlap a lot. A lot of the resilience genes and stress resistance genes, they overlap with a lot of the longevity pathways. So it's very relevant to all things that are ready to help. Yeah, you kind of, put it very well together. So I think like what we experienced as a humanity, like the COVID era and post COVID, that was a kind of like a it was a turbulence for sure, and it tested our resilience as a human humanity, as a like a global conscious being, but also in a single, like, individual level. And, many of us got very sick and, hopefully, most most people recovered. Of course, it always takes a toll on certain people, but I think this was a very good test to humanity as a total total and, it also bursted. I think this book also got a little bit inspired about the factors that are affecting resilience. And, there's a lot into it. So, yeah, this book, Resilient Being, you are also co authoring it and this is a statement of all the aspects that how you can develop your own resilience, how you can actually live in the world. You don't have to be in a cave, you don't have to be in isolation on an island. Of course, that would test resilience in a different way, but, I see also many people kind of, retracting themselves of the society and just like maybe moving countryside and just living the natural, life. Of course, that's also the possibility, but then then it's kind of missing the point of interaction and contracting different kind of, maybe threats, I don't know if threat is a strong word, but different kind of things that challenge our physiology, our mental capacity, our being in total. So, if you think about the Buddha who went to the mountains in isolation trying to find enlightenment and eventually came up back to the people and realized that you're not gonna do it alone. So we we also need each each other in this life. So Yeah. And, you know, you can't avoid it completely. There's always gonna be, you know, the entire human history and life on this planet has been a different kind of catastrophe one after another. So you never will be able to avoid them altogether. You need to be prepared for them in advance, both physically of having your physical health in check and mentally as well of being mentally prepared for all the uncertainty and dangers that come around at some point. You know, nothing is as certain as uncertain. So that's a good phrase. Like, also these kind of things force to live in the moment, and that's like you you you don't know what's gonna happen next. Of course, you can do some predictions and what's the likelihood of an asteroid hitting the planet or beginning of World War II, three or what whatnot. So, but if you go too much into, like, the possibilities or the threats then you're actually losing a lot of energy. So it's it's it's it's wise to recognize okay hey now it's it's like winter season it's there's a lot of viruses like hovering around what I need to do to manage and go through that. How can I prepare myself? How can I prepare my body, the mind, and what what do I need? And, in this sense also for me like the seasonality and and, like, realizing all the cycles, macro and micro cycles that we go through the life, it's it's, when you learn to, like, just go with this the cyclic nature of life, then you are more able also to fine tune yourself and tune in to to the flow, this dream, the flow of life. So that's that's how I see it. And if there are like disruptions, like major disruptions. So I can give an example. So for for example, the past year I haven't gotten sick, no flu, nothing. And, multiple past years like before that, we always in the wintertime went to the Canary Islands or something tropical and just disrupted the body homeostasis. So our bodies were already in winter mode and it's a different state physiologically. We go more inwards like the core temperature maybe gets a little bit lower and our immune system is is like, it's in a different state. So when you disrupt the homeostasis you go into full summer like full sunshine blasting your system and many times I got sick after being three four days like just taking too much sunshine. So that's also a good example of a hormetic stressor that goes beyond like, twenty minutes, some very, very much okay. But if you go if you be there five hours and just like blasting yourself, so it's it's it's a major disruption to the system. So my point is that embracing the cyclic nature, for example in Finland and Estonia, we have clear winter, we have clear spring, then clear summer and fall. So that not escaping necessarily like the dark times, like the dark, there's no light, it's very cold. Just, you know, going through that and when you go through the winter you actually realize, hey, this made me stronger. And, when the spring comes, you're suddenly like, oh my god, how much life and how much energy you get. So you kind of teach your body to go through these phases. So if you always escape, I need the light, I need the sun, then then you're kind of missing here or something. Right. Yeah. So, yeah, you need some some periods of, let's say, non optimal, even sun exposure or non optimal, let's say, immune system function for your body to actually become stronger and more resilient. Yeah. And finding, like, limits. I like to go, like, to the limits at times. Like, what is the limit? What when when does the body or the mind say, okay, now it's enough? Like, could be, like, sauna session that lasts, like, let's say five rounds of twenty minutes in the sauna and in between two minutes of cold exposure. That is a lot. That is most likely way too much, but how do I respond to that? Most likely it will cause a major stress reactions to the body and then recovery. And then like fine tuning what is the optimal dose for me? So, for example, for me, it's it's two rounds usually or three rounds sauna, maybe fifteen minutes and then two times cold exposure in between and that's that's a good dose. It doesn't go overboard but then then it's also it does train the body and the mind as well. Yeah. Yeah. And I mean, this is the biological phenomenon of hormesis. So that the small stressor or a toxin makes the body super compensate for it so that, it would be able to tolerate it better in the future. So, like, exercise Mhmm. You exercise, you cause some damage to the muscles and, your nervous system. And, you know, it signals the body that, hey, in the future, for us to adapt to it, we need to ramp up all these adaptation pathways to, you know, make us stronger, more resilient, increase our antioxidant defense, etcetera. And, you know, the same applies to, you know, I mean, like, you know, getting a tan is that as well, like your, your body makes the tan. Yeah. So the operator is the melanin production so that it would be more resilient against UV radiation from the sun and you wouldn't get sunburned, that easily. And, you know, it applies to all these different formative stressors like cold and heat and oxygen and, exercise, food, etcetera. Yeah, plant chemicals and many kind of things that would be considered as toxins in higher doses, but in smaller doses they are actually causing this pleiotropic pro survival program. This is a fancy way of saying that it's like preconditioning our cells to endure more stress and actually improve the cell survival. Yeah, I remember writing about it in my book as well that if these mice in these studies, most studies, they're like preconditioned with heat before getting injected with a particular toxin, then they survive the toxin a lot better compared to not having experienced this preconditioning kormesis. So, yeah, like if you're exposing your body to, let's say, these beneficial stressors in small and moderate amounts, like the heat or exercise regularly, then, yeah, your ability to tolerate an actual toxin or an actual, stressor is, much better. So you're experiencing less damage and you'll recover from it, faster. This is also very interesting, like, if we think about different kind of creatures and organisms, we actually wrote wrote about those in in our book. There are like thermophiles and tardigrades. Tardigrades is a very interesting, very, very, very small creature, and it can stand like temperatures ranging from minus two seventy two to as high as, plus 150. So so that that is a quite huge range. So whatever happens to the Earth, they would probably survive. Mhmm. And, they they go through this process called cryptobiosis. So they kind of change it's not like a camelon that changes the color but they they change their appearance and cell structure and also like other content and they can also stop the biological processes to put into kind of this very strong hibernation. So I think humans also of course we are not enduring these kind of things but we can definitely strengthen ourselves and it's I don't think it's coincidence that we have both heat shock proteins and cold proteins so those mean that we are we have been evolutionary enduring these kind of states and things. Yeah. So we wouldn't have these pathways if we didn't have to use them. Yeah. Yeah. And and like use it or lose it. It's a get down with it. It's it's you don't wanna just like lie lie down on the couch and need some ultra processed foods or foods and then just like, pamper yourself all the time. Like, self pampering, I think it's overestimated. Of course, you need that too, like, relaxation and just, like, warmth and coarseness and things like that. But, like, having too much of it, it's it's not leading anywhere. So Yeah. If it becomes your default state, then you're gonna your body will, you know, your body will always adapt to what you give it. And if you're always, you know, pampering and, cozy, then your body will be kind of non resilient and very weak and not able to tolerate any kind of a stress. Whereas if you voluntarily expose yourself to moderate amounts of stress, then your body is more stronger and more resilient. So, yeah, like nothing, nothing in the body is without a reason, like your body doesn't wanna waste energy and it always adapts to the environment, whatever that environment may be. And also, like, if we think like social social socially how do you pronounce this? In a sociological, maybe a little bit of psychological way, exposing yourself into these situations, Let's say like public speaking, speaking in front of a class, I know many, like, they they they don't wanna do that because they they are fearing that they embarrass themselves. But going into these kind of situations will eventually lead into more resilience in these kind of states. And then you're just, it's just, the thing you do. And, maybe I ask you a question. So let's let's put, like, this kind of situation that, you you've gotten embarrassed in front of your school class for saying something stupid, and then you create this mental concept of shame. And then you don't wanna do it ever again, and it's haunting you until the adult life. So what what would be your best strategy to kind of, like, confront this and, like, go kind of go through it and release it? Mhmm. Well, I mean, I was more shy and, like, very afraid of, like, public speaking, in school. But, yeah, as I as I become an adult, I I I don't know. Like, I guess I, well, I did do, like, some, I guess, exposure therapy, small things. I joined, like, the Toastmasters local club where I did public speaking there because I did it for the sake of, you know, I know I needed for my job in the future, like, being an author and, content creator and, like, entrepreneur. Then I need to do public speaking because it's a very valuable skill. And I guess, but I was already kind of more comfortable doing that in in university as well where you give some lectures or, those kind of things in front of class. So I don't know. I guess I, you know, personally, I just grew grew up in that sense of not becoming more courageous or more bold and then not being afraid of people that much. But I guess exposure therapy of gradually exposing those things, yeah, which is the key. I think that's why we Yeah. The same psychology or psychotherapy, like you actually overcome like phobias and those things as well, like mild exposure therapy. Exactly. Yeah. So so let's take an example that, if if you have, like, conscious parents who are aware of these kind of things, and let's say, daughter or or a kid is, afraid of speaking in front of school, so you can practice, like, public speaking in in front of them, like, in a safe situation Right. And then gain confidence. And then eventually, like, maybe you speak to your friends and and and, like, try practice, like, things like that. So, I already I also did, like, this exposure. I wasn't that, like, Fred, but I I remember in high school, it it was kind of like, there were quite mean people and then, like, getting getting like, hey, you suck. Like these things like that. And but from a young age, I I tended to expose myself into all kinds of things that were really, like, hard. Like, like just to give give an example, maybe this helps, if if we have like some younger listeners. So for example, I was about 20. In the beginning of medical school, I wanted the job to get some more money. And I did this kind of job that I needed to wake up at 04:30 or 5AM. And, then I took a bus that took about thirty minutes. I went to this Finnish Red Cross blood service. I was just, like, getting these kind of, like, test tubes and things like that in. So I worked for three hours from about six to nine, then I went to school, and I did this, like, multiple, days per week. But that that eventually led into a very nice summer job in the lab, and then, you know, from there on. Mhmm. And, so I kind of, like, sacrificed sleep a little bit, and I didn't think about it that much, but also like exposed myself into very uncomfortable situations and and things like that. So I think this this kind of things that when you do from a younger age on this will help you to also grow, as an adult and build this kind of resilience and that go into these uncomfortable zones and places and and like, like, not being comfortable all the time. So that's that's also, I think, why people do cold. It's uncomfortable for sure, but you get the reward at the word also like sauna. Like, if it's to like, let's say 90 degrees and you spent there fifteen minutes, it's it's it's getting uncomfortable, but then you endure it and you get the reward. So I think here, the the getting the reward is essential. Like, you get whether it's internal or external or just like a physiological reward, usually these lead to these kind of rewards that make you wanna do it again even though it's uncomfortable. Mhmm. Yeah. I guess we can then talk specifically more of these examples of these hormesis and ways to increase your resilience. Physical resilience is obviously more relevant to actual physical health. So yeah, we can start with you. You talked about sonars and cold, so let's maybe start with that. So, like, what are the, you know, besides the increased resilience to heat and cold, like what are the actual physiological responses and benefits? Yeah. But well, as persona, I know you have been also talking about this quite a bit. And like, we're lucky to be in Finland, who has the best research on solar therapy and Lokanen et al. I think they are the most productive ones. So, it seems that sauna is an exercise mimetic, but it's also an individual, way of activating different kind of pathways that you wouldn't activate the other ways like not with just exercise. So for example you're not activating like heat shock proteins or FOXO3 proteins of course NRF2 it's a major pathway but maybe that's like the physiological benefits why a person would want to go to sauna is mainly like cardiovascular benefits also reduce cardiovascular mortality and, the more you do it the more benefits you seem to be doing it. But when I talk about this, let's say in my lectures or webinars or whatnot, there seems to be this curve that where there's a sweet spot and the sweet spot seems to be four times per week and around twenty five minutes like a total per session. Of course you get more benefits when you go go into the sauna, let's say like every single day it's probably beneficial. But I've noticed here this could be just personal but if I do it too much my autonomic nervous system gets too stimulated so that that's leading into lower HRV. So you also I think you also need to take it as a practice kind of like a physiological exercise type of practice So you don't wanna overdo that as well. Yeah, of course, like immune system response is increasing white blood cells eventually leading into better immune response. So you gave this example of of this, was it the mice or Mhmm. That was injected with this toxin, kind of like a virus or something like that or endotoxin, and, it had a better response when it was exposed to heat like previously. So this this kind of hypothermic conditioning, it's it's, that's that's how how you call it. What else? Well, let's say you have problems with, insulin resistance, blood sugar regulation issues, anything like that. I think this one of the best ways to fix insulin resistance and just leading that the glucose and energy goes better into the muscle, better into liver to be stored, not not stored as fats. So there's a lot to it into it. And, I have this, image that I show. It's from 2018 from Laukkanen. Laukkanen, it's Kulutsor. And there's this nice nice circle. So what it does cardiovascular wise is that eventually lowers blood pressure of course, the immediate rise in blood pressure but this is kind of like an exercise to the system that regulates blood pressure. Also lowering arterial stiffness, though this means that your, the circulation and the vessels become more elastic and also reducing the intima media's thickness. This is also a sign so it might get very thick and also that leads to elevated blood pressure when the circulation and the blood vessels are not elastic. Also lowering inflammation, lowering reactive oxidative species, and interestingly I see an improvement in lipid profiles. So, major improvements in lower triglycerides, lower ADL, cholesterol, higher HDL and also endothelial function. So the stiffness of course it's it's related to this endothelial function, which means that the inside wall of the blood vessel or the artery it's like dilating more easily. So this leads into lower blood pressure also lower heart rate like resting heart rate and better function so you don't need to pump the blood to a pressure that's very high. So I think the cardiovascular benefits are the most important ones. Of course there's a huge list in their latest review article, I think it was from last year or 2023, there were like 20 different kinds of chronic diseases that sound therapy might have a beneficial effect. Doctor. Yeah. The heart disease is the biggest, what I see as well in the studies. And, yeah, it's like mimicking a small cardio workout. So you're sitting there and your heart rate increases, your body temperature increases slightly. So you're having, like, a, yeah, like a mini cardio workout that, has all these, like, other benefits on the heart and the blood vessels and the brain as well as, you know, cerebrovascular organs. So, yeah, it's very it's kind of, like, feels like almost half of the benefits or the half half of the effects you see in the studies related to lower mortality of heart disease and lower Alzheimer's and those things come from just, yeah, like this mini workout that you get from the the sitting down and the other half of it probably comes from the heat shock, and the reduction in inflammation, from from that. The heat shock proteins are also like super interesting thing. Why would you want to activate heat shock proteins? What do they do? And what does wrongly folded protein actually mean? I don't know if you have if you have opened up this concept ever, but, protein has a three d structure so that it's functionable. And if it's strongly folded, it becomes dysfunctional. So heat shock proteins actually fix these, mal, kind of folded proteins to so so they make the proteins work again. You make the protein great again. It's great. So make a protein great again, go to solar. Okay. Yeah. So, this is one thing also, like activating the autophagy bath pathways. So, or putting, like, all these things together, I think, like, combining and I know also it let you think think and often recommend it, combining exercise and sauna together. Like, I remember doing this forever, like, since I was a teenager, like, doing a workout then go to the sauna. So I thought this was what everybody does. And in Finland that was like it was the case. And also in gyms there's always a sauna and people always go into the sauna for about fifteen-twenty minutes after let's say, bodybuilding or like a strength training workout. I didn't know it back then. It just felt good, but it's it's a kind of like having major, extra benefits for for the session. Mhmm. Yeah. And, if you would do it and if you would, let's say you would want to activate these, protein folding effects, autophagy, and things like that. So ideally, you would want to fast until you do the workout and go to sauna and only only then refit. So this would probably create the best benefits in terms of like a renewal growth hormone autophagy with proteins. What's what's your take? Yeah, I mean, I do think that after the workout is the best time to do the sauna. So you're boosting the recovery, you're increasing blood flow to the muscles for supplying the nutrients and repair mechanisms there. And the growth hormone increase as well will help with recovery. Fast ed, you don't wanna go to the sauna with a full stomach or having digested a lot of food. Yeah, that's a problem. Yeah, I would maybe go on empty stomach at least or something that's easy to digest if you're doing it after a workout, you don't always need to work out fasted, but if you do, then keep it not that heavy if you plan code with the zone after the workout. So, I think, yeah, there is even like, yes, it helps with this immobilization, like recovery from injuries in a lot of these mouse studies as well. They like, you know, crush the limbs of the, of the mice and then heat therapy supports the recovery faster. And I personally have also taken this on after workouts for many years. And I do think that it enhances this if you like, you know, compound it. So to say, like you do this sauna after workouts for ten years, then you're gonna build more muscle and underperformance than if you don't do that, you only do the workouts with all things being equal. Of course, it's impossible to do that experiment, but given the mechanisms and the other experimental studies, then, you know, Berson, I think that would be the case. And interestingly, it seems that just going to the sauna, like a real, dry sauna, Finnish sauna, Estonian sauna, whatever you wanna call it, that you actually throw water into the stove. So that that is the sauna, like a real sauna. So, it seems to create some kind of muscle building signal as well just by going to the sauna. I don't so I don't I don't think, like, you're gonna get jacked by just going to the sauna. You need, of course, to some kind of resistance, to the muscles, but it seems to be also like like somewhat increasing like my cons and, these kind of things that help to build the muscle tissue. Yeah, there is one study I've seen that, yeah, they did twelve weeks of like 100 degree sauna, which is quite hot, and, the people who did the sauna had slightly higher muscle and more bone growth from that. So probably have some growth hormone expression, but yeah, it's very small effect size. It's not gonna be super significant. Yeah, I was thinking of like, I saw the study. So maybe if you go into very high temperatures, maybe that's, the the the case. Like, if you compare, like, anyone who's gone to sauna knows how different it feels to be in 80 versus 100 degrees. 100, like, you get this kind of, like, burning sensation, and you don't wanna be there, like, fifteen minutes, maybe maybe five minutes, especially if you throw the water in the stove. It's gonna get really hot. So that could be like the case, like extreme hot temperature. What about the cold? So, that's also the one question people always ask, like, should I do the cold exposure after the sauna and what are the effects of cold? Well, interestingly, I haven't seen any studies that would take a like a take a closer look on this traditional cold hot or cold heat. Like, we go to the sauna, you go to the ice bath and and do it multiple times. I haven't seen any studies that would combine Yeah. These kind of things. So only we only have, like, heat sauna studies, then we have, like, cold exposure studies. So I'm kind of like wondering what? Like how come nobody hasn't done it? It's it's not that hard to put this kind of like, it's very easy, I think, to do this. Like there's thousands of Finnish people who do it all the time, so I don't think it would be that different, like, difficult to get people into these kind of studies. So maybe it's just, yeah. What do you think about this? Why why aren't there any studies on this? Yeah. I I don't know. Like, maybe in Finland, everyone already does the cold pretty much with the sauna. But, yeah, it would be still easy to do separate the two of people doing only the sauna and people doing the cold contrast therapy, together. So yeah. But I mean, yeah, like, there's no studies on that specific. There's the studies on cold, which indicate that there's some, like, immune system benefits, anti inflammatory benefits. Obviously, athletes do a lot of cold exposure to recover faster and those kinds of things. So, yeah, there is that evidence. And I would say that probably you're getting if you're doing the sauna, you're getting the benefits from the sauna, and then you jump into the cold, you tend to get the similar benefits as you would getting from the cold therapy studies. So, yeah, I don't know if there are any additional benefits by combining them, but if you do both, then you're getting the benefits from, what the the both studies indicate. Yeah. And it's it's a very like if you just do sauna without the cooling, it is a quite different game. So it this is like, I think it's kind of like a turbo or mega megadose of both Mhmm. In in the same session. So that it would be very interesting to see see, like, studies on this. Of course, they are completely opposite in terms of, of course, temperature and, also kind of the effects. And, what what is interesting is the activation of these cold shock proteins or CSPs. And this is something also that's on a major well, basically all of the organisms have this kind of, system. So so they the cold is I think this is even more we are exposed to than, like, extreme heat. I think like if you think about the history of the sauna therapy and the heat therapy, there are these sweat lodges, there are Aztecs, and these like angel cultures that have had kind of these heating, rules, but I don't think we have evolved that much. Like if you think about the cold, there have been periods of very cold, times like ice age and all these kind of things. So this is I think this cold is even more evolutionary system that that, humans throughout time have been exposed to. Yeah. And, the metabolic effects are, of course, like, quite different. So every everybody knows like the immediate effects on noradrenaline or norepinephrine and dopamine, and of course like a rise in cortisol temporarily, but it seems to be also managing that. Let's say you have too high cortisol response all the time. So if you do do cold therapy that response it's gonna get a little bit lower even though in the moment there is a surge of cortisol, but you're also like kind of training the stress response And the more you do it, you can train your body to endure different kind of stressors. And of course, this this is usually combined, with, conscious, like breathing and people who go the cold for for the first first time, they're like, I don't wanna get out. So it's it's a kind of this reflex. And then when you do it again, you kind of start learning that. Okay. Ah, okay. This is the way to do it. And then you do it again, and you learn to control the breathing, and eventually you end up being there longer and longer times. So this is how how the process usually goes. And then you endure a lot more and this I think this is the biggest reflection to any kind of stressful situations that you learn, okay, this is stressor, I get this feeling. Then you start to, maybe like even unconsciously if you're programmed that into your system, regulate with breathing. So I think cold and the breathing, they always go, like, hand in hand. Mhmm. And you can precondition yourself to the cold just doing a couple of, like, slow slow breaths. But what happens metabolically, it's, it's a bit similar to HEAT in terms of like activating GLUT4 receptors. So you are improving, the glucose regulation, insulin sensitivity, but what is major difference is that you are activating brown adipose tissue or BATT and the more you do cold the more this regular white adipose tissue goes into this brown. And what does this mean? Brown? Why is it brown? It has a lot of mitochondria which generates a lot of heat, so this is kind of a slow metabolic response for the cells to to, hey, I need we need to warm you up. You're like, you are dying. You are getting the cold too much. We need to upregulate the cellular systems that keep you warm. But just similar, like, in the same time, you're ramping up your basic metabolic rate, and you're actually burning more energy. And it seems that the brown fat is also using the energy from from the white fat droplets. Mhmm. So in in that sense, you you can be if you do it properly, you can actually, like, lose weight without changing anything else. And I I've seen this, like, multiple times. For example, I got this Finnish, Sisu handmade wooden ice bath like at the end of the year and then I it was super cold then like minus 12 or something like that and I began doing it every day. And I was there usually around four minutes or something like that on a daily basis, and I realized that I've been losing some fat. Mhmm. Like, especially visceral fat and of course subcutaneous fat as well without changing anything else. So this there is a potential also for like activating the brown adipose tissue and creating this kind of like, calorie like artificial calorie deficient state that without changing even, like, your dietary patterns or anything like that, you're gonna be, like, burning more of your in like, the visceral fat, subcutaneous fat, both, for fuel. Yeah. And, those those effects are, like, I've noticed that as well whenever I've taken the ice bath or cold exposure for, like, a longer period of time. But, yeah, like, they're more like, like, a temporary adaptation to to that cold. So if you, yeah, like, keep doing it for many months, then eventually your body will adapt and, you're gonna, like, burn less calories in doing that. So you need to kind of change it up, to not do it all the time and to have, like, some breaks. If your goal is to keep, you know, causing new kind of a shock to this is them. It's like just like Arnold was in my head, like, the muscles need to get shock. You need to create a shock. So I'm thinking of, oh, I'm doing bench press, but then I run into and do leg presses. And so it's a shock to the system. Also confusion. Yeah. Just a different topic. But, yeah, like, good example of not like, if you do all the things the same all the time, of course your body will adapt to, it doesn't feel that cold. Oh, okay, I don't need to produce any more pran aridibos tissue, I got it. So like changing the patterns, changing the practice, what you do, having a little break every now and then, like if you do it too much, that's also like a eventually could be leading to extra stress because this is also a stressor. It is the hormetic stressor that trains your system to endure like more stress, but you can of course do it like too much as well. So Yeah. Yeah, absolutely. And if you do too much, you might get sick at some point. So, you need to balance all these stressors with enough recovery. So, if you do too much stress, too much exercise, too much cold, whatever, too much calorie restriction, and you're not recovering enough with proper sleep and nutrition and just relaxation, then, yeah, the kind of, the balance goes off and you get sick and you get some sort of, you know, downtime, a forced downtime from, the stressor. Whereas, yeah, your body will always endure as much as it can. So, and and how much your body can endure depends on, yeah, like your nutrition status, your sleep, your overall stress, and kind of this hormesis, like how, how is, how is your immune system and how is your physiology adapt to, stress and that particular type of stress. You're always very, Your body is very adapted to heat or cold, then you might not get that stress that easily, but eventually you might if you go beyond what your body is capable of. And this is like, it's a very good reminder that we are all like individuals. We endure different kind of things and also the seasonality has a lot of effect on this. For example, personally, when I have about eight years of data with the Oura ring, this bastard here, so, I see these macro cycles. So usually, like, the HRV goes to the lowest in in the like middle of the winter and then it reaches the highest, in the summertime. And I think it's very natural. There's a lot more light. There's a lot more like sun, more warmth, and things like that. You're not, like, that stressed that easily. So so or also, like, understanding how much should I put on my body, like, at this specific time and and realizing that, hey, okay, maybe this is this is too much. And, what what I personally do that with ordering, there's this, like, daily stress curve, and it it has a it shows you how many minutes, like, been like fifteen minutes, thirty minutes, two hours, how many minutes I have been stressed. So it it's recognizing this kind of like temperature, pulse rate, HRV, and then calculates, okay, this is like high stress, low stress, anything in between. And I I I like I notice from there that if if I'm already a bit more stressed out going into the heat, it's actually creating a stress spike. That is not the problem by itself because usually I saw that after that there's a recovery response that is pretty immediate. But if if that recovery response is missing, then it's usually just an, like, accumulated stress, and then I just, down regulate it. Okay. I'm not gonna do sauna today. I'm just gonna, like, let's do do a cold shower. Just take it easy. So you can adjust yourself when you, like, learn to interpret interpret this kind of signals with data. I think the data helps a lot and then you get to know your body and and you all you began, like, noticing how you feel and that then then this is something, like, you can teach your system and become more intuitive also, like, realizing, okay, today, not that good. Many many people follow like very rigid exercise programs like, alright, today I need to do that even though they are feel like trashed and like, actually today would be a good day just for recovery, but it's in my schedule. I need to do this strength workout today, and that's eventually leading into not super compensation, but actually going lower and lower. And, in in this sense, it also would require more time to recover. So what's your take on this kind of approach? Yeah, I agree that constantly pushing the envelope and redlining the exercise, eventually it's like your body doesn't have time to adapt. So if your goal is to just exercise and burn calories, then yes, just every day doing a ton of exercise will achieve that. But if your goal is to adapt and get stronger for something, let's say lift more weight or run faster or something, then your body has limited resources. And if the resources are always used for recovering from the exercise instead of adapting and getting stronger, then you will never adapt. So you don't wanna redline it. You wanna under underline it slightly, but be in the adaptation zone. So close enough to redlining it, but not really doing it. And then your body is able to then super compensate. So, yeah, like, you know, whenever I'm trying to, let's say, grow stronger or build more muscle, then I'm not actually going to failure with the exercises. Because, yeah, like usually the growth, you achieve that already with getting pretty close to it, but not to completely. Nine, eight, even seven. Yeah. Yeah. Something like that. You know, eight, eight probably. Yeah. So, on a scale of one to 10, you will be like on an eight or nine kind of range. Yeah. Yeah. That's true. And like when you train your system and your body, you become also more, like, in good in good terms with your body and you become you know, you start knowing yourself better. But if if you're not challenging your system and going to the limits and maybe sometimes over it, you're not actually knowing how how you deal with these kind of things. And, for many people it's it's like, what ultimately is like, let's say you push yourself in the gym, to go to the failure, it's not that much of the muscle damage or delayed onset muscle soreness that's, hindering you, but it's more of like this both central nervous system and autonomic nervous system fatigue that is actually taking a longer time. So maybe we can touch a little bit about the vagus nerve, the autonomic nervous system, And of course, like, you're the interviewer, so of course you can go. No, I think that's where you wanna go. That's an important part of the nervous system. So, and that determines whether something is stressed or balanced. Do you think we can go there? Yeah. It's it's like, the vagus nerve, it's it's super interesting because, it's actually, like, starting from here, like, the brain stem, and then it's it's coming from there. There's this u glove foramen and, it is the longest nerve, I call it like the conductor of the of the human body, kind of like it's it's regulating so many things. And, like, let's say you have a sensitive nervous system, then it means, like, your vagus nerve, it's it's more I think it's it's reacting more easily to different kind of stressors, and it's it's getting more, like, out of tune, so to speak. Let's say it could be anything from emotional, psychological things that are internal, and also like anything that's happening physiologically, biochemically in your system. And then of course you have like everything that's coming outside, like from the environment, anything coming from the food, anything like, light sounds or like your closest people or threats. So it's it's reacting to all of these and you can for sure train the vagus nerve with different kind of things. And of course, like cold is is a very good way of training your vagus nerve and it's creating this heightened activity after the session of of the vagus nerve and creating higher HRV readings and things like that. But there are like a lot easier ways also to to like kind of stimulate it And, well, if you go back a little bit to what vagus nerve does, it's innervating the major internal organs, especially also the digestive system. So many many people have problems in their gut. They actually have a problem with the autonomic nervous system, the vagus nerve. So the easiest way to activate vagus nerve would would be like coral like, what is determined in English? Like, you have a little bit of water and Mhmm. Gargle. Mhmm. Do something like this, and, of course, like like, humming or singing, anything that's, creating this resonance, with troll singing. That that is my favorite. And I I realized that if I'm, like, stressed out, I might actually start, like, doing, like, things like this or also, like, laughing, one of the best ways. Then you're like the diaphragm is like you're creating, like, these kind of responses, and it's, it's a good way also to help de stress other people and see, like, activating their vagus nerve. So it's it's it's a it's quite, like, delicate system that is, oftentimes, it's it's overreacting to something that might be a threat. And, like, how do you see, like, a hyperactive, like, autonomic nervous system that that is searching threats all the time? How how do we kind of calm it down and, like, train that, hey. Everything is safe? Well, you know, I think usually it's something something is, yeah, irritating the nervous system, whether that be some inflammation somewhere, neuroinflammation, or something, gut related, autoimmune related immune system. If your immune system is, like, triggered constantly, then, that's gonna also keep you on your toes. And, yeah, I mean, a lot of things need to be figured out, like where does it originate from? Is it, sleep? Is it some sort of, yeah, allergic reaction? Is it something environmental? Is it just, yeah, that you're just stressed out of from exercise or whatever thing is, psychological stress as well? So, trying to kind of put a stop to that. And, because if you're in that state, then you're not going to be able to recover. You need to actually get out of that chronic nervous system activation and to, yes. Yeah. I I think that this is like the most important point you said there, like going out of the fight or flight or the overactive sympathetic system. Then only then after that you can begin to recover. And like, I have an example like from my life I used to be well let's say I can easily go like overboard and like do do too much and just activate my system to the maximal sympathetic tone. And, but I can also calm it down more easily. But when I was a younger doctor, I did like this five year period of going from place to place as a young doctor, mostly ERs and very very high stress environment. And I think that period I was most of the time, if not all the time, in a sympathetic tone. Mhmm. And I also worked out a ton, like five five times a week, two hours every session, CrossFit, and things like that. And I remember, like, also sleeping too much, and every morning I woke up, I was very anxious and and, like, a bit sweaty. Mhmm. So that's that is a sign of cortisol. I might wake up multiple times per night sweating. So like in a very high state, but even like with this super high level of sympathetic tone and stress, I didn't go to burn out. So so I I'd been probably close to burnout multiple times, but I don't know what it feels like to be absolutely like worn down. So so the body and the the psychology, it endures quite a bit of stress. Mhmm. So so, what what's your take? I know you you haven't been there probably in your life ever because you have been you have been so wise to regulate it and know your system and know all these kind of things that I wish I did knew like twenty years ago. And, maybe like the point is that you the the system endures quite a bit before it breaks down. Mhmm. Yeah. But it's wise to, like, have the brakes from the overactive super dynamic system do these kind of, let's say micro breaks and you can use gadgets like from anything from sensei to pulsed toe to neuro sonic vibration or red light therapy also seems to be activating partial sympathetic tone. And just, I think the point here is just to not wait until you're super exhausted, but incorporate on a daily basis moments that you do these kind of things that train the vagus nerve, train the parasympathetic system so that you are more resilient to whatever comes. Yeah. Well, I think in your case, you probably were, you know, very fit and healthy that your body was used to that stress. So you never, like, actually completely burnt out, and your body was, yeah, like, adapting to the chronic cortisol and the stress so that, you know, you don't really recognize what it feels like to be normal until you actually get out of it. So, yeah, you know, your body is adapting to the stress as well. And, you know, over time, it's gonna wear you out. But if you, notice that and get out of it at the right time, then it's like you're able to recover from that. But I do believe a lot that if you make your body more resilient, then your body will also just handle the stress a lot more. So like a Navy SEAL, let's say they are exposed to extreme stressors, and they're probably able to handle unless they have PTSD, right, which is a different story. But if they don't have PTSD, then they're able to tolerate everyday stressors a lot more easily. They kind of stay calm, mentally cool and calm in a lot of, like, distressing, situations in everyday life, unless they have, like, PTSD, which is this kind of your, overstressed the system and to the point where coping, with the stress. So, yeah, there's always like a fine line. Like if you completely break the system, then, yeah, you're gonna go into the more like this traumatic state, where you're more vulnerable and more volatile. But if you're, like, never really reached that overburden state, then, you're increasing the average resilience. In this, I think being, like, physically fit and also, like, exposing your system to extreme physical stressors. That was, even though like thinking now backwards like doing fourteen hour shifts and then workouts, how much time is there to actually recover, not that much. But, not training the body, not being physically fit would have probably led to burnout a lot sooner. And so so this there here comes like the learning to train your body. I would say on a daily basis, doing something doesn't need to be, like, a two hour workout, but doing something, like, cumulate Libby, that is helping your body to endure a lot. And also, like, well, I can give an example how, for example, my training has been changing throughout the years. Mhmm. So in my twenties, I I hammered down whatever it was, bodybuilding and then came CrossFit. Multiple years that, two and a half hour sessions. I've done Olympic weightlifting, like gymnastics that required a lot of skill development and also that they were really hard like training sessions. I wouldn't do that like anymore. I'm 45 now. So so how I've changed that, it's more intuitive type of training, but I train throughout the day. Of course I might have like a separate workout sessions, but for example here at the office, yesterday I did 100 squats with kettlebells to 12 kilo kettlebells on a Hyperwipe divided into three sets. And then I ran down the stairs with the kettlebells and up, like to the 8th Floor. But this was kind of like sliced into these micro workouts. So every 30 minutes I will do something like this. It's so it's it's not stressing my system that much, but it's creating this capacity also to endure different kind of stressors, but also like improve the body and and like maintain or even gain strength. So so thinking training a movement in different way, it is kind of like microdosing different kind of ailments, different kind of stressors. Yeah, so I think this is a better approach especially when you get older. Of course, if you just want to be super fit and strain your body then these like regular workout sessions, are are probably a better way. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. Like, sprinkling it around the day rather than having a very grueling workout in one sitting. And getting a dog? Mhmm. Like, I know you have a you have a dog. She is or is it a he or she? He. So he's how old? One and a half? One and a half, two. Yeah. So we have about the same golden retriever, so it requires a lot of movement, a lot of, like, playtime, a lot of walks. So that that has also brought into the element of de stressing, like playing with it. It's it's a it's a really nice way to de stress your system, not just, like, just be in the moment, not thinking about anything, but also, like, having a dog that requires a lot of exercise movement and walks, it's also one of the best ways to build, this kind of slow, engine that also helps you to endure more of of the stressor. So I I I see having a dog, especially it's a de stressing element. Yeah. For sure. Like, it's one of the best de stressing, activities to just play with the dog or go for a walk. What about like, nutrition side? So that's obviously very more nuanced. So it's not that black and white that you should eat like crayons or, nails to make your body stronger. But, yeah, you mentioned like these plant chemicals, before, and, that's also very controversial online. So obviously there are benefits to those. It's very well researched that a lot of these different ingredients, have beneficial effects on the body. I guess the answer is like how much and and in which people also there's individual differences. Yeah. A lot of very fascinating plant compounds. And, I'd like to highlight, like, the adaptogenic herbs, adaptogens. In the book, we have about 20 pages of adaptogens, like very thoroughly written under like rhodiola, Shishan Rajwagandha, Tulsi, Reishi, ginseng, like different forms of ginseng. We have cordyceps and maca. So I think these are the major adaptation curves that really used in a specific way, let's say in a tincture or double extract with water or alcohol or both or glycerol. They all have different kind of effects because they extract different compounds from them. I've been playing around with adaptogens for maybe ten years, a little over, maybe twelve years, And, I used it on a regular basis. So, I can break down a little bit. It's it's, like you definitely want to read this book. Just a small reminder of this. Mhmm. You can even read it on on, when you before you go to bed. This doesn't weigh as much as a sour biohacker's handbook. It's a bit hard to read, before going to bed. But, let's let's start with, Reishi or gonoderma lucidum, Latin. This is, one of the oldest, mushrooms, medicinal mushrooms. It's it's, it's kind of like a spirit gateway or the spirit herb in terms it's definitely not psychedelic at all, but it's, a side experience it it's creating, the connection to the subconscious mind and also maybe opening up senses. In in a physiological level, it's definitely calming down your system, might have a little bit of GABA effect, but also like overall like calming effect with these different, beta glucans and many, many other things. And it's it's, one of the oldest herbs in Chinese medicine and used, also could be called as a longevity herb or immortality mushroom or the elixir of life. Lingxi or 10,000 year old mushroom. So it's it's very, very beautiful also growing wild in Finnish forests. And, I use wild Finnish reishi usually in the evenings. And what I've noticed is it calms down the system not in a way that it's just like that you get from like GABA end users like, let's say, taurine, glucosinib, but it's more like subtle. And also, sleep wise, it definitely increases REM sleep. And, the more you take RACEY, the more, I would say, wild dreams you get. It's it's, really opening up some set channels that are, the way to your imagination, maybe some other realities as well, but this is of course more metaphysics. And, yeah, what an adaptogen means, it helps your system to adapt to different kind of stressors. So I also see RACE kind of like this adaptive system. It also regulates somewhat immune system that if it's like let's say your immune system is not it's not active enough so it can up regulate it, but also if it's like overactive it could down regulated. But, I would be careful if you have an autoimmune condition or anything like that. It could be could be a problem, but this is one of my favorites for sure, and I've been I've been using it for a very long time. You've been using your dreams as well. Yeah. I've I've been using, like, multiple years every evening, and I dream a lot. Sometimes it's it's a you wake up in the morning, like, oh. Mhmm. What happened? Like, crazy interstellar, like, we could go there. Like, I have had so weird dreams, like like, contraction with different kinds of spaceships and, like, aliens and astral projects and and things like that. So I think crazy has a lot to do with that, but also it it kind of, like, shakes the subconscious mind. And in dreams, you can, like, interpret what's what's going on subconsciously, like these themes. And of course, it's it's not, like, concrete, but it there are themes that might throw rise up from your subconscious as you maybe haven't dealt with. So in that way, I see RACI as a powerful tool to work with your subconscious mind. And also that helps to build resilience, like when you know what's going on beneath the conscious mind. So, yeah, that that is RACI. Maybe I I just pick three of my favorites. Yeah. I have to go through the entire list. Yeah. So I I think like the second one would be ashwagandha. And it's from Tibet. Originally, it has also thousands of years of use. There are different kind of forms of ashwagandha, like, I would go with this like highly standardized extract like, Centuril or KSM sixty six. And even better, Shodan Ashwagandha, it's a bit more recent one. So this is my favorite because it definitely has helped. It increased testosterone levels in men, but also lowers cultural levels and, has has a more of a targeted effect. So I I'm not that big of a fan of KSM sixty six. It's it's more like all over the place. What yeah. So so if you live a high stress life, KSM of course might help, but I think the Shodan is it's it's more beneficial in this sense. Of course, like, with these these are kind of like natural drugs that could have potential interactions with any, like, medications. So if you're doing any GABA medications or SSRIs then definitely it's a I would mix this together. So, traditionally it's a thought of this kind of like a rasayana herb strengthens and rejuvenates. Mhmm. And, how how I see it, I would take it in the evening just to de stress and calm down the system, lower cortisol, elevate testosterone levels. So so this is, yeah. What what what would be the third one? Let's say, well this is of course my personal opinion. I use rhodiola or rose root. This is, it's it's this is kind of like opposite to Ashwagandha. This is more like uplifting. It creates a lot of energy. It has a lot of effects like beneficial effects in the in the brain on different neurotransmitters and also different parts of the brain from limbic system, prefrontal cortex, even to hypothalamus, also regulating the HPA axis, downregulating corticotropy and also downregulating too high cortisol and epinephrine levels. And this is something I don't use all the time. It's it's usually in these periods if I feel I need a little bit of uplift and I don't wanna do too much coffee. Mhmm. Because the difference between, like, adaptogens and stimulants is that stimulants, they are and then they rub your system that you need to recuperate. But adaptogens, they build your system, like through the time so they're not causing these kind of dips, in energy levels or intellect that they are not consuming resources from your system, they are building, helping to build the resources. So rhodiola very good for cognitive work but also for physical stamina, physical exercise. And, yeah, so I would this this would sum up like my top three adaptation curves. Yeah. That's a good list. Like, I I use rhodiola occasionally and reishi as well for the sleep. Yeah. But what about, like, the nutrition side that, certain plant chemicals like, lectins or, you know, gluten and, those kind of things, are they, like, you know, harmful for some people, or why do you think there's such a, like, conflicting response in how people will digest them and how people react to these ingredients? Doctor. Yeah. So now these are anti nutrients and there's a whole bunch of anti nutrients. This is something we open up in the Biocass handbook, so you should get that one too if you don't have it already. Yeah lectins, one of the group of antinutrients also like this clairidine or prolamines in general that are found in all of the grains. Actually, it just happens to be that the gliadin or the prolamine protein from wheat, it's the most prominent one and it's, probably, potentially could be causing some issues. But these are also like it's kind of like a a hormetic dose. Okay. Let's this is a disclaimer. If you have an autoimmune condition, you are already ragged or like your gut is is, let's say you have a leaky gut, it's highly inflamed, then even small amounts of anti nutrients could be causing major issues and problems. Well, let's say your system is pretty healthy, you can think these also kind of like as a hormetic stressors to your system every now and then having some anti nutrient high foods, like could be like a sourdough bread every now and then or eating some beans that are known to have quite a bit of lectins, but not too much. It's it's, yeah. So I think this, if you call like, avoid all of these potentially, harmful, substances through time, it might be causing that in the future you're not tolerating them at all. So this is also the case for many plant chemicals that actually have beneficial effects, high polyphenolic content Yeah. Plant chemicals. Mhmm. You don't you don't wanna over consume those Right. Right. Either. So Yeah. I mean, it applies to the soil in general. So, like, soil bacteria and touching the grass and touching the dirt. Doctor. Yeah. Yeah. Doctor. Playing in the dirt as a child is what actually builds your immune system and builds your microbiome. But like I, one of, like I'm, I'm able to like pretty much tolerate all plant toxins in, like, very large quantities. I can I can eat, like, all the be I can eat, like, probably, like, a pound of beans every day? I can eat, like What? Like, a, like, an entire loaf of, bread, regular wheat bread every day. And I would have no, like, issues with that. Like, no delisted issues, no skin issues, no rashes, no gut issues, anything like that. You know? And I do think a part of it is because my parents are, like, we grew up in a countryside. We were playing in the dirt all the time, and our immune system is strong from that. And our microbiome is strong from that. We drank raw milk and we, yeah, got exposed to a lot of like pollen from nature and we were next to a wheat field with the wheat. And so, yeah, like my immune system is just so developed and so diverse in that sense that I don't have any allergic issues or immune system issues from that. Whereas, you know, nowadays people live in the cities, you are very sterilized, you're not exposed to the natural soil and natural microbiome. So you're actually deficient in that microbiome component. Doctor. Yeah, this is a huge, huge point. And you have been living the optimal childhood in terms of, like, the environment and, like, the natural way of living and exposing yourself to beneficial micro like, microbiota and, like, microorganisms from the from the surroundings. Yeah. This is, definitely that's carrying to the other world. Unfortunately, I didn't have this that much, like, of a beneficial experience. Of course, we like, every summer we were in our summer cottage and played out in the woods and with soil and things like that, but I didn't live in the countryside. And I drink drink, like, litters of milk, like this, nonfat, like highly processed milk. Mhmm. And, like very bad quality bread and things like that throughout my childhood, which eventually led into gut issues, inflamed guts, and a lot of acne when I was younger. Yeah. And all these things went away when I in my I I think I was about 25. I changed the diet that I removed all dairy and all grains, and every skin condition, gut issue kind of went away. So, but when you grew in this kind of, natural environment with natural food, natural habitat, you develop so strong system that even these potentially harmful, chemicals and toxins are not creating that much of a response. So, I don't know if I wanna eat any beans because I don't really, really like them, but if I would, I would get a lot of symptoms. Also, like, unfortunately, many of the fermentable foods are not very good. But, this is just like fine tuning your body, what suits your system, and how you can practice your system or like with small doses implementing, let's say, you are very reactant to like, garlic or onions or things like that. Having just small amounts of these every now and then would probably train your system to send the signal from the brain that, hey, this is not dangerous. It's okay. So this is kind of like what what are done with the different kind of allergies just to make the system and the especially while it's the immune system that reacts, makes makes it send a signal that is safe signal. Hey, this is actually okay. And then you start to tolerate these things better. So I think this is a lot wiser way than to totally remove everything for the rest of your life. Right. Yeah. And huge genetic component. Some people react to certain foods, others don't. The same way with certain other chronic diseases, some people get the disease, others don't. So, like cancer or diabetes or something, genetics is a very big part in that as well. And, yeah. And you can improve it with certain, perhaps probiotic supplements can fix or improve some symptoms in some people. And fixing some of the underlying issues, like why is your immune system overreacting? Like I said earlier, is it some sort of underlying inflammation or something in an environment like mold? Mold toxicity can overreact, overreact, overreact, overactivate your immune system and And she was just taking, like, certain medication for that, like a mold medication. And that has actually helped her to, tolerate a lot more foods now that she's been using Yeah. That medication because it treats the mold illness. So she gets What's the cholesterol mean? Yeah. Cholesterol, actually. That's the one. And, it's, actually helping her to tolerate foods that she couldn't before because of helping with the mold inflammation and that kind of thing. So, yeah. Usually it's not, you know, yeah, like up to these certain food, like undercooked foods, like raw, a lot of raw foods can have these, more anti nutrients, etcetera. A lot of cooking destroys them or reduces them. But, yeah, like sometimes it's just underlying gut dysbiosis, underlying information on underlying autoimmune reaction to that, that makes it, or body react in a specific way. Doctor. That is, that is, it is a huge topic. And also the gut health is, I would say, also in at the core of of many resilience features because we are holobiont, we are a holobiont that consists of a lot of different microorganisms. And then, like, it's not just our genes, it's also the microbiomy and just the whole genome and everything that's around us, that has an effect. So, like, let's like, in your example, you probably have a very high microbial diversity, which which is a huge thing in the gut, And Inka probably has like a lesser one, like and also problems with the intestinal wall, so called leaky gut, which often creates a leaky brain because they're so similar and the blood brain barrier structure is similar to the gut lining structure. So everything that fixes the underlying information and the condition is really helpful. But this is, I would say this is just another topic that could be caused or talked, like, hours. And, actually, yesterday, I just gave a talk or or a workshop on this, like, two hour workshop on how to fix issues in the gut and the liver with natural methods. So as we can deduce from all this, our systems, it's it's quite complicated and and, like, very sophisticated, and many things have an effect. And those internal bastards could be creating a lot of issues like let's say lipopolysaccharides, these kind of bacterial endotoxins that are causing the problem from the inside out. So, treating these kind of issues is also a way to self healing and eventually creating better resilience. So it's it's a it's a journey like when you start learning about these things and you take the first step you begin, I kind of I I don't like anymore the word optimization that much, but you you began to take responsibility of your own health and your own well-being or your own life. Also, then you it's it's a journey when you learn these kind of things and what are the things that are working for you with also trial and error, but also measuring things. Like, how would you know if you don't measure anything? Yeah. So becoming aware, like, you you cannot guess what's in your gut. Like, what what is the microbiota, like, consisting light? It's it's, impossible. So becoming aware with the data, it's it's, really helpful. And then after that you can ditch the data for a while and just like go on what you do. Let's say you contract some kind of problem whether it's it's it's a toxin microbial issue or anything like that then you can go ahead and measure again and, do things that are required. So this is this is the personalized way also for medicine to treat people. Yeah, absolutely. But yeah, you're right. We can start wrapping up the gut disease, these kind of worms. Where can people get the book and learn about you? Yeah, go to biohackercenter.com. There's everything from our books to Siem's books to our courses, ebooks, a lot of cutting edge supplements. We have a lot of webinars and, I've written a ton of free articles, I think like over 100 free articles that are basically mini books on different kind of topics. The latest ones are like liver detoxification, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, and optimizing thyroid hormones and things like that. Bicorecenter.com, you can also or order the book there. And of course, this is an invitation into our event that's now turning 11 years old, previously called Biohacker Summit. Now, we have kind of changed the direction. It's HoloLife Summit, holos meaning whole, holo life meaning like holistic life, and and not just biohacking but also transcending biohacking and, incorporating like self transcendence, self actualization, realizing what is your purpose, what is your mission here, and what do you want to do to help others and create something unique into this world. So Hololive Summit takes place actually in Estonia. This June seems gonna be there. I'm gonna be there. Let's let's see if you're gonna be there. So hololifesummit.com and our hub and store is buyakersummit.com. Yeah, sounds good. We'll put the links in the show notes. And, yeah, thanks for coming. The last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you adopted sooner? Not taking everything so seriously. So, like, and, yeah, just, you know, having more fun. I've always had fun and, like, laughter has been my secret power and humor, but sometimes you lose it when you, like, lose yourself in the work. But, like, yeah, enjoying life more, having more fun, and, just not taking everything so seriously. Mhmm. Yeah. That's good advice. We feel stressed as well. Yeah. Well, yeah. Well, thanks for coming to the show, and, yeah, it was great to talk with you. Yeah. Thanks, Seem, and catch you later. Ciao. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.