In light of the evidence that some sun sunscreen ingredients also cause oxidative damage and get absorbed through skin and also may have other nasty consequences, it doesn't have to be a neutral pH because the the theory that skin has a pH of five five point five, that's, in my opinion, obsolete. Let's begin by what everybody should do as a skin care routine. Alexis, welcome back to the show. Thank you. Thank you for inviting me back. Yeah. You were very popular with your last episode as well, where we discussed your three step, program for longevity and antiaging, but we didn't, like, go into depth with skin antiaging and the aesthetics, which is also actually very important to a lot of people as they get older and, obviously, has a lot of auxiliary effects on, your overall health and, like, behavior and just the self esteem and those kind of things. So, yeah, I'm happy to have you back and discuss about, you know, your protocol when it comes to skin antiaging and anesthetic, side of things. So, yeah, maybe we can maybe start with, how does your, let's say, skin care routine look like when you're treating, like, patients? Mhmm. Right. Well, first of all, I I would like to say that I quite agree with you. When when we discuss, aesthetics, it seems to some people something more, superficial, but it has a strong impact on our self esteem. And I've seen that in my patient's evolution and in my own, taking care of my skin, and how how important it is for us to feel young, to look young, to see ourselves in our youngest version and, like the way we look. I'm sure that we'll also have some, retroactive, biological, retroactive effect on the biological processes of aging, which is, an area an interesting area of study. So that said, let's begin by what everybody should do as a skin care routine in general terms, and then get into detail, give you examples of what I do, when I see a patient with a certain need. But let's let's just imagine a general case of skin aging without any other skin condition. So the first things we should, do is, analyze the the current degree of photo damage, which is a worldwide problem. And we can see it not only in in Mediterranean countries because people travel a lot nowadays. And we go to sunny places. We just happen to like that. So, we are exposed throughout our lives. And the other factor is that we live much longer than what our skin, if you allow me the, if you allow me the license, what our skin is designed to weather in terms of, in terms of, resilience against aggressors. And the main aggressor is sun. So we need to actively repair that damage that accumulates over time, and we should understand, first of all, how to recognize the this type, this this damage in particular. I'm not talking about inner aging. So if you happen to have more wrinkles than what's average for your skin type, if you have thin skin, you're going to be more prone to develop to developing wrinkles. But if you are, let's say, 25, you have been tanning every year for the past, seven to eight years, let's say, for twenty days a year, you'll probably start developing deeper, expression wrinkles than the average person of your age that does not expose themselves to to sun. So that's one sign. More wrinkles, deeper ones, and drier skin. Second second sign of damage is skin thinning or skin atrophy, which you can feel as loss of suppleness. If you touch a child's, cheek, you'll see it's it's pretty supple. It's pretty full and thick. Whereas if you touch an old an old person's an an elderly person's, skin, it's much thinner, and it's like, like a paper. So that's another bad sign that you're having, that you're having advanced skin aging due to sun exposure. And the third one and the more obvious one is, the appearance of sunspots or, let's say, discolorations. It doesn't have to necessarily be sunspots because some people don't develop them because they they are lighter skin types, but they develop discolorations such as the yellowish color or sometimes redness, sometimes redness in in certain areas of the face, and sometimes in more advanced stages, changes in skin texture, which involve precancerous, lesions. So if you start feeling like your skin isn't soft anymore in some places and it begins to heal from time to time and, some minor scaps or scaling appears. That's a really bad sign, and you should you should start, taking action to repair that damage and to protect yourself from further damage. So, yeah, like, you can see certain things or changes with the skin that were are related to the sun damage and, aging of the skin. This episode is brought to you by Bone Charge, my favorite company for blue blocking glasses, red light therapy devices, and red light light bulbs. These items are essential for keeping your sleep wakefulness cycles aligned in a world that tries to mess them up. Instead of looking at your phone before bed and letting the blue light disrupt your melatonin production, why not wear blue blockers instead that prevent that from happening? Instead of having your bedroom lit up with bright lights, use the more sleep friendly alternative by opting for flicker free red light light bulbs that don't disrupt your sleep. Boncharge also has amazing infrared sauna blankets that can give you the same health benefits as the traditional sauna. You also get the unique benefits of infrared light that improves joint and skin health. Head over to boncharge.com/seamland and use the code seam, s I I m, for a 15% discount. What do you think about, like, this face analysis like, we did, like, in the India retreat where we were? I use that I use that at my clinic. I'm sure most people are familiar with them because you can see them at many pharmacies and at many department stores, especially at the cosmetics department to try to sell you everything. But, these are pretty useful if if you know how to interpret the data, of course. I use them, as I said, regularly in my practice. So, when you come through my door and you want a skin examination or skin analysis, first, it's the clinical history. Of course, I need to know what you've done in the past to understand the current situation of your skin, whether you are a smoker, whether you apply any type of sunscreen at all, which is still surprisingly rare among some people. And I don't mean to use a makeup with a with an SPF 15. I mean, using a real sunscreen, which is SPF 50 or SPF 50 plus to be effective. So first step, physical examination of clinical history. Second step, if I see any suspicious skin lesions or sunspots, dermoscopy, which is that magnifying glass. In this case, I use a digital one to check for abnormalities or any any atypical mode. I would examine that. And third step, I use the polarized light, skin scanner that you mentioned, which is based on usually seven types of light, different types of light, some UV lights, some infrared lights, and some visible lights, which reflect different, different, features of your skin. For example, with visible light, we can see the pores and the wrinkles. And these scanners come with a software that analyzes, counts them, and analyzes them, and compares them with the database. And what I really like with my device is that it compares, the patient's results with a database of 6,000,000 users, which is, quite a big sample. So I can get pretty reliable results. Although, as I said, you need to interpret them well, especially, for example, if you're, a man with a beard, that can sometimes be misinterpreted as, more pores or more wrinkles than you really have. So it may it may raise your skin age, and it's an artifact. So it's not it's not real aging of your skin. But usually, the development of large pores is a sign of aging, and that's not sun related. That's a sign of biological aging. Development of wrinkles, especially, dynamic wrinkles, that's due to an excess of strength of the muscles of the face that we develop during throughout life, but also due to loss of collagen and elastin. And then the other aspect that it shows, which is to me the most interesting, is what we cannot see on the physical examination, which is the infrared absorption that shows whether your skin is inflamed or not. If if you have a condition such as rosacea or atopic dermatitis or if you don't use the right products, you're going to have skin inflammation, and that's shown in the infrared light scanner. And then the other one is the UV light, specifically the the the woods light, which is a particular wavelength within the UV spectrum, which shows, it can show a lot of things, but it shows sunspots that have not had yet to manifest. Mhmm. So so skin changes within the dermis. Interesting. And you can predict, the amount of sunspots that the patient will have by looking at the at the woods lamp. Mhmm. Also, UV woods wood light is going to show you, some types of skin infections, and it can show you, something called porphyrins, which is a type of protein produced by the by the puttycobacterium acnes, which is the bacterium that causes acne. So it will tell you which areas of your skin are more prone to it. Yeah. That's interesting. You mentioned, like, the pores and the wrinkles are being signs of aging, skin aging. I think, yeah, wrinkles, everyone kind of knows that's a sign of aging. But what about the pores? So, like, they're like, the skin becomes there's, like, bigger holes in the skin, I guess. So because, like, the the the dermatologist I talked at the retreat, she said, like, you shouldn't do, like, a lot of sauna that much because, it makes the pores bigger. So is it is the sauna then, like, aging the skin, or what do you think? I haven't seen that in my own experience. Quite quite the opposite with steam sauna in particular. It allows you for for a deeper cleanup of your skin, so you can you can remove sebum better. If you apply your cleanser after the sauna and I don't know about the dry sauna, but it's a a subject for for study. It's interesting. I wouldn't think it has any negative effects over pores. So I I kind of disagree with this dermatologist. And I actually think that in the long term, it may help prevent some some aspects of biological aging because solar is a well known method of activation of, autophagy, and in particular, the removal of misfolded proteins. And glycation is one of the underlying causes of these dilated pores, the accumulation of broken misfolded proteins in the extracellular matrix of the skin. And the other the other factor of sauna would prevent that or would ameliorate it, at least. And on the other hand, this dilation, of course, is due to a misregulation of the sebaceous secretions of the skin. So if you don't clean your your skin daily, if you don't use a proper skin cleanser, you're going to have obstructed pores. And you should imagine the pore like a volcano. So it opens when it tries to expel all the sebum. If it's partially obstructed, it will open more and more over time. Mhmm. If you clean it well and if you allow it to expel the right amount of, of secretions, rapport, it won't need to be as open. Wow. Yeah. That makes makes sense so that, the, like, is the pores aren't yeah. Like, the problem is the sebum that you need to kinda clear out, to prevent the pores from getting larger in that sense. Correct. Sebum plus anything that you apply on your skin will leave a residue. Anything. So you should you should be mindful of that. You should be conscious that every night, anything that you've applied, like from sunscreens to makeup to any type of serum needs to be removed. The excess needs to be needs to be removed. Right. Yeah. That's that's, yeah, good good to know. So, like, you what kind of cleanser would you like? What types of cleansers are there out there? Is it like you could use regular soap or regular water or This is one of the this is one of the usually three products three basic products that I give on my on my first consultation. And it would be it has to be soap. It would be a liquid soap. And it it doesn't have to be a neutral pH. Because the the theory that skin has a pH of five five point five, that's, in my opinion, obsolete, and that's what the cosmetic industry still recommends in gen in general terms. But, you will find a few products that don't necessarily have to be designed for, for the face, but which, adjust much better to to what skin needs. If you if you take a quick look at, to the literature, you will see that human human skin in most studies have shown, an average pH of 4.5 to 4.7, which is much more acidic than 5.5. On the other hand, the cosmetic industry calls 5.5 neutral pH, but from my chemistry lessons, I remember that neutral pH was seven. 5.5 would be considered the pH the ideal pH for a perfect skin, which nobody has. So we should aim for a lower pH. Mhmm. And additionally to that, we must factor in that running water in most Western countries has a pH of eight to nine. So even if you apply a 5.5 to your perfect, skin, you won't be getting a 5.5 when you mix it with water. So to my experience, what works very well to regulate both dry and greasy skins is pH, a soap with a pH from three to four. Much more acidic, but we already have those in the markets. For example, most baby soaps and most intimate gels, they're designed for skins that are not the skin and for mucous membranes and skins that are not fully mature, that don't have a big protective layer. So in order for for us to not irritate the skin, we must use these type of soaps. And there's a few that I recommend, a few brands that I recommend, which are not, either Intimate Gels or Baby Gels, but anybody who listens to us could use one of those, would would see the difference after a while in terms of, not feeling their skin dry after after cleaning it and seeing the pores reduce in size, and feeling the skin more hydrated during the day. And so reducing the need of applying moisturizers. Mhmm. Yeah. That's very good good to know. Yeah. Like, I guess, like, the three three in one shampoo might not be the best option for that to wash your face with. That's the most popular product, among men, I think. We we like to keep it simple. Right. But, actually, these soaps can be used for the scalp as well. It won't dry a an already dry scalp. So that's a general recommendation for everyone. Try a gentle acidic pH from three to four every night. And try it for at least one month, and you'll see the difference. Mhmm. What about, like, some of these scrubbers, like some sort of, scrubbing, odor or something for the for the skin? Well, that that brings me to my my the second, the second product that I that I give, as part of the skin care routine, which are retinoid creams. If you're using any of those, don't scrub at all. So scrubbing is only going to remove the outer layers of the epidermis, which are dead layers, and those layers are already removed by retinol, tretinoin, or any form of, retinoid. Even lipoic acid or salicylic acid will remove them partially. So you shouldn't be using those. What I tell my patients is treat your skin like you would treat a baby skin. Okay? Because we get we're going to take it closer to that than to an adult, aged skin. So scrubs, if you do them, only use them in the body, in the areas that tend to accumulate more dead skin, like your elbows, for example, but don't use them on your face. Mhmm. Especially use a soft sponge. You can use the classic marine sponge, and that's going to work well. Yeah. Before we move on with the next steps, sunscreen. So, you mentioned that's, like, one of the foundation foundational things that we do to protect your skin from, aging, and there's a lot of, like, conflicting opinions about sunscreen. So, yeah, obviously, you know, I think it's irrefutable that, the sun does, etcetera, skin aging, whether or not it's gonna be, like, inherently bad for your maximum lifespan or something. That's, besides the point about, I think it's irrefutable that excess sun exposure does, like, you know, increase the likelihood of wrinkles and age spots and those kind of things and sunscreen. Even sun exposure, which is not in excess, would do that over time. Just natural all the time. We should differentiate the two types of sun damage. One is the acute one, sunburns, and that's the worst one because it predisposes you to melanoma. But there's also chronic damage, and that's let's say that each person has a different threshold for that. Some people are able to, resist large amounts of sun before seeing any signs of damage, but it increases aging regardless of the of the amount. So we should keep it to a reasonable minimum, which is, we need sun exposure for for other to obtain other benefits, because the Cajun ridden regulation, among them. But we should try to protect ourselves well using sunscreens all year round. And secondly, we should avoid sun exposure, within the pinnacle hours of the day. So from noon to 2PM, 4PM, depending on the time of the year, we should avoid it. We should try to we should use both physical and and chemical sunscreens. I mean, we should use, physical protection, not suns not sunscreens, but physical protection, hats, caps, anything, umbrellas. And on the other hand, we should use a type of sunscreen that at least has not proven any type of toxicity so far. And there are such products. So I'm being very mindful of that. In light of the evidence that some sun ink sunscreen ingredients also cause oxidative damage and get absorbed through skin and also, may have other nasty consequences like endocrine disruption. We're talking most of the of the classic chemicals that these these creams contain behave like an estrogen and can get absorbed at least in small amounts through the skin layer. So we we haven't we haven't demonstrated any type of negative consequence in humans yet, but we must bear in mind that there are not long term studies that, that do that. So what we the data that we manage is animal data. And the only thing that the regulatory agencies care about at the moment is acute toxicity. So if it proves to irritate skin or cause any toxic effects on your liver, on your kidneys, etcetera, it's going to be out of the question, banned from the man banned from the market. But if it shows some minor endocrine disrupting effects, which don't prove to cause, for instance, cancer in the lip linole, in mice usually, it's going to be allowed up to a certain concentration. So in my practice and after a after doing a thorough research, I've, ruled out any type of endocrine disruptor from my recommendations, and that includes most brands. But now I'm going to go through the chemical subscripts. I'm going to be a bit technical. Sorry for that. But I'm going to go through the technical subscript that I concluded that in, at present 2025, are safe. These recommendations may change, but at the moment, this is what I've got. We have physical sunscreens or minerals. Minerals, usually zinc oxide and titanium dioxide. Out of the two, I like zinc oxide. But the problem with this one is that it does not cover you well against, UVB radiation. It's a good it's it's a good sunscreen against UVA radiation, but, you need to use very high concentrations to protect you well against UVB, and that makes it quite the opposite to a cosmetic product. It makes it quite chalky and and quite dense and uncomfortable, in your skin. But there's products that try to compensate that with, very light, excipients such as aloe vera. There's some macro brands out there, very good ones, with zinc oxide. This is a valid option. If you don't aim for a s for an SPF 50 plus, so the maximum you're going to get is an SPF 50 out of zinc oxide. Mhmm. Then there's going to be mixtures of mineral and chemical sub screens. On the other hand, titanium dioxide, I don't like it, for several reasons. One is that it's toxic through inhalation. So strays that contain titanium dioxide should be avoided at all costs. Second, it's it's not toxic in the in the natural form, same as zinc oxide, when applied to your skin. So non nano, zinc oxide and non nano titanium dioxide. It means it has not they have not made the type the crystals the tiny crystals of this of these minerals, into smaller pieces, which could which actually have been shown to, get absorbed through the skin layer and cause oxidative damage. So the non nano version should be safe for human use, but titanium dioxide is not safe in warm waters for, for the sea, wildlife because it transforms into hydrogen peroxide Mhmm. Even in the natural form. Yeah. So in order to avoid for environmental toxicity, I don't recommend it. Then we have the chemical sunscreens. I just need to consult my my notes on this because, the names are quite tricky to remember. But I've come up with one, two, three, basically, three chemicals that are or should be safe according to the current evidence. The main one is the the so called triazone or triazone. In this in this particular case, it's the ethyl exyl triazone. It's a UVB filter, so it would complement well our zinc oxide. It's very photostable, which means that it lasts for a long time when exposed to the sun. It does not, disintegrate easily. It's not genotoxic. It's not toxic to genes according to human, sorry, according to animal data. There's no mutagenicity associated to this product. No mutagenic effects. No fetal toxicity. Okay? No toxicity for newborns and for pregnant for pregnant women. And it's not an endocrine disruptor, which makes it makes its safety profile, one of the best. Possibly toxic, it ingest it, but the absorption through skin is less than 2%, which is good enough. Right. Okay. So Airfield, Exhild, Triazome. You can look at the ingredients of of your sunscreen and see if it contains it. If it does not contain any of these three and it contains other chemicals, we should we should look at them one by one, because, I may be missing some information now. But if it contains octopriline, oxybenzone, or salicylates, like, xyloxylsalicylate. Any of these three are endocrine disruptors. Octopriline, oxybenzone, and salicylates. Salicylates to a lower extent, but, I try to avoid them as well. They're not a good sunscreen. They're very mild. They don't provide much benefit, and they irritate the eyes. So that's to avoid them. Second type second type of safe sunscreen, safe chemical would be dithylamino hydroxybenzoyl hexyl benzoate. In short, uvinul plus or parcel DHHB. Uvinul plus is the popular name, but you won't see UV node plus in your list of ingredients of your subscreen, so you need to look at the the entire word. Right. It's a UVA filter. Non genipoxic, non mutagenic, non toxic for fetuses, non endocrine disrupting effects demonstrated so far. Risk of allergy is very low, which makes it a very good, safety profile overall. It is not as photostable as the triazone, but they usually combine it with, some photostable ingredients, some ones that are more photostable. Zinc oxide, for instance, is very photostable. So you can always apply a chemical sunscreen and then a zinc oxide gel or cream on top after a few minutes. Let it dry, and then apply the second one on top. And third third chemical is bamotrazine bamotrazine or bis ethylhexyl oxythano methoxifenyl triazine, which is from the same family as triazones. It's UVB and UVA, sunscreen, both in one. Same as the others. No toxicity no toxicity shown so far, low risk of irritation, low risk of allergy. So in short, these three should be in your daily sunscreen if you want a safe product. Otherwise, if you cannot find any which contains these three I know of a few brands here in Europe like SVR, Aven, which I have no conflict or interest with them whatsoever. I just happen to, like them as the only chem alternatives for chemical softscreens that don't contain all the nasty ingredients and that have an acceptable cosmetic profile, so they're not unbearable to wear on your skin. Mhmm. But there's more brands. There's very good Korean and Japanese brands, which you can look up, which contain these ingredients. Yes. So this this wraps up the the sunscreen, what I wanted to say about about sunscreens. Yeah. I don't know if you have any question regarding this. Yeah. Like, I I think we'll maybe put, like, then the names of those chemicals in the description so people it's easier for them to find those. But, yeah, like so, like, some of these products, are there, like they can be a mix of these different chemicals, or they're usually single, the main chemical? They're almost always a mix. Mix. Because they're limited by law in the concentration that they can have of each ingredient. According to animals animal data, they won't be able to have the higher concentrations than what has been studied in in the animal studies. So almost always, you'll need to mix, at least two types. Yeah. What do you think about this, like, tallow sunscreens that have become popular? Tallow sunscreens, that's an SPF. But no. Tallow. Wait. Tallow fat is not a sunscreen at all. It it's actually a magnifying magnifying agent, so it will it it it's going to create a more homogenous tan, but, that's not a good touch screen. You have some vegetable oils, like cranberry oil, which is like an SPF eight, SPF five. Mhmm. Let me just have a quick look. There's more natural agents. Coconut oil is a natural sunscreen. Mhmm. Avocado, I said cranberry, But there's more plants like walnut oil, aloe vera. This would be an SPF seven. Evening cream rose, green tea, black tea. You can you can use them as complimentary ingredients. In in some in some Korean brands, they add them as complimentary ingredients, but you cannot base your sunscreen routine on those. It's Yeah. Insufficient. Not enough then. They're too low in SPF. Right? So what else do you mean? It has to be, like, at least 30 or 50? Or Well, difference between thirty and fifty and fifty plus onwards is just, if if they contain the same mixture, it's at the time that they are stable. So a 50 plus is the longest acting, substance, and it would it would last around two hours. So if you use a 50 and a 30, you can count on thirty to sixty minutes of effective protection. That's why I insist just use the SPF fifty plus all year round. Mhmm. Then you won't need to reapply it as often. Right. Yeah. That makes sense. And how do you yeah. Like, do you apply it in the morning? Do you need to apply several times a day? Or if you're in if there's not a lot of sun, or when should you apply it? So I do apply it, by system every morning regardless of the weather. And then depending on my daily activities, I'm going to reapply it every two hours, or I just, will stay with with one application. But in general, for, let's say, life in the city, I would recommend at least to apply it twice. Twice during the winter, during the winter and, spring autumn season. And during summer, more if the if where you live, the the daylight exposure is longer. Let's say once in the morning, once at noon, once in the afternoon. Three times. But if you spend if you spend your Sundays outdoors, you should be reapplying it every two to three hours. Mhmm. Makes sense. Alright. You've also mentioned retinol, which is also, like, another very popular skin antiaging ingredient. So maybe we can give a little overview as well of what is retinol and, like, how does it work. Mhmm. Yeah. Sure. So this would would be like the third integrating part of my skincare protocol. We've mentioned the soap and the sunscreens. And then we need something to regenerate your skin, which is, basically an antiaging, substance because we get rid of old cells, of damaged cells, and we replace them like copies of your of your epidermal basal layer, which contains stem cells. And it's basically a younger skin. So for that purpose, the number one ingredient is retinoids. Retinoids are a family of ingredients derived from vitamin a, which basically what they do is increase cellular turnover. So they stimulate the basal layer, and they make your stem cells awake and divide faster than they could or they or they would be able to, limited by by your biological aging. So it's an ability that we lose over time. Then, out of this family of ingredients, there's some which are cataloged as cosmetics. For example, retinal, retinaldehyde, retinol. These are anybody can buy them and apply them. And these are the milder ones. These are also the safer ones. So the main adverse effect with retinoids is irritation because it basically it produces some some degree of skin inflammation. So the other the other ingredients that are not open to the public, but are the the strongest ones and the ones that we use in our clinical practice are retinoic acid or tretinoin, adapalene and tazarotene, which are new generation retinoids. Much more powerful regenerating the skin, but not not, everybody can tolerate them. So they are prescription only. Any any practitioner who uses them needs to be very mindful, needs to be very knowledgeable on on how to building a tolerance with these substances and how to select the right patients for them. Because if you already have an atopic dermatitis, or if you have rosacea, or if you have acne, sometimes your skin won't be able to tolerate the the premade concentrations that you get, from commercially available substance, from commercially available drugs. Like, there's one brand in Europe, only one brand that contains tretinoin, and only a couple brands that contain adapalene. And these are fixed concentrations. That's why I work I don't use those. I work with compounded creams. I I formulate tailored creams to each of my patients with the exact concentration that I think they can tolerate. But in general terms, if we talk about the the most widely used retinoic and the strongest one would be tretinoin, and tretinoin has three standard concentrations. You should start treating your skin with zero point zero thirty five percent. Don't try anything about that, early on because your skin won't be prepared, and you won't be able to apply it every day. It will peel your skin on the third or fourth day. You'll have to stop and start again, And then the the regenerative process won't take place because you won't you will only be peeling the outer layer. You won't be stimulating the basal layer of the skin. So you need to build the tolerance, starting by lower concentrations and increasing them gradually, according to tolerance up to as much as your skin can tolerate. So my my record at the moment with a few patients is a tretinoin concentration of point 35%, which would be the equivalent of 35% retinol. Wow. It's insane. There's no there's no cream that contains 35% retinol out there. Mhmm. So you you can get very fast thick skins. With these creams, but it's usually thick skins, really greasy greasy type skins that tolerate retinol or retinoic acid best. So this is the main ingredient of any antiaging cream. You can complement it with other acids depending on the purpose. Like glycolic acid is very good for sun sunspots and for dry skins, that shouldn't be used by acne prone skins because it is it's going to increase skin secretions. It's going to to increase your, oily oily skin areas. And you have salicylic acid for those type of patients, which is a very drying very strong drying agent, and also a mild keratolytic. It also removes, external layers of the skin, but very good for those with dilated pores. Then we have other types of ingredients that I like to mix with my retinoids, like peptides, topical peptides. For instance, there's one that's popularly known as topical Botox, which is called, acetyl exapeptide or, artirelin. It works well for the under eye area. It will relax your your muscle a little bit, and it has some antioxidative properties. Also, moisturizers are very important, alpha, bisabolol, phytoglycans, which are a form of, proteoglycan, not hyaluronic acid, but smaller molecular weight. Hyaluronic acid lacks evidence, topically for your skin. It doesn't get absorbed well. Although nowadays, there's a few, hyaluronic acids in the market that have a modified molecular structure to make it smaller. And in theory, that increases absorption, but I'm not I'm not experienced using those. I prefer phytoglycans, so proteoglycans of vegetable origin. And then, on a different category, we have, firming agents. For instance, DMAE, DMAE, it's an acronym, proteinethylamino a ethanol. It's also an antioxidant. And, peptides. There's one very good peptide that I started to use last year with good results, Aplevitie. That's the name. U p l e v I t y, ductility. It's basically a a tetrapeptide which works by overexpressing genes involved in cellular cohesion, so so skin tightness. Okay? Unions unions between cells. And it also enhances, a few enzymes that are important in the process of culture synthesis. So culture and elastin synthesis. So we it should at least increase, the most external layers of the of the dermis. Mhmm. Right. When we when we want to treat skin sagging, almost always we need a more invasive approach. So this this is nice to include in someone who hasn't done any skin care so far to treat to treat their their skin wrinkles and and sagginess, but we would almost always need to complement that with, some type of revitalization such as hyaluronic acid injections or collagen stimulator injections to reach to reach the deepest layers of the cupped dermis. So, like, the problem with most products is that they don't reach the the deeper layers of the skin? That's that's the main problem. So they keep improving that. Now they can reach the dermis, but still, it's a it it provides an eye wear effect. So for someone who's 20 35 years old, it may be enough. But for 30 plus individuals, 35 plus individuals, they will most likely need, a more invasive approach, whether it's lasers lasers if they want injections, such as IPL or CO2 laser, or just directly injecting into the deep layers of the skin. And that brings me to a different matter, that I wanted to mention. There's so far no evidence of any, cream that works for cellulite because it it cannot reach the subcutaneous layer. We're talking that this is the epidermal layer, the most external one. Underneath, we have the dermis. Some creams reach the dermis. And underneath the dermis, there's the subcutaneous fat where the cellulite occurs. So the ladies spending huge amounts of money in anti cellulite creams, it will only provide benefits of, maybe improving liquid retention. Maybe, the the fact of applying the cream with a massage, with a gentle massage, may help improve the aspect of cellulite, but the active principles won't reach the subcutaneous layers. Interesting. Yeah. What about, like, microneedling? So, like, that that has been seen to, like, enhance the effectiveness of certain of these serums and beams by, you know, opening up the skin and enabling it to go deeper. Is it, like, like, one, like, way to make certain things more effective? It is, but but you really don't need it for that purpose. So if you want to, let's say, open channels, it's it's much, much better to directly inject with an eagle Mhmm. The the substances. And if you want to improve skin texture, like acne scars or superficial wrinkles, microneedle microneedling on its own is going to help with that without the need of applying any serum or any substance to enhance its absorption. Just the fact of creating tiny wounds is going to stimulate collagen synthesis and will regenerate the skin. So it reaches deeper layers than creams, but not as deep as injections. Mhmm. And not as deep as lasers. Right. Makes sense. There was there was a very good image on the Internet, which, I'm trying to find and and share with the audience, that shows the depth the depth of microneedles versus the depth of a fractional laser. Oh, here it is, I think. The fractional laser can virtually reach any layer of the skin. It can it can actually trespass skin depending on the on the potency on the on depending on the amount of energy released. Microneedling only acts on the surface. So let me try and unshare screen. Mhmm. Here we go. Hey. There we go. So, well, this isn't exactly what I was looking for. This is microneedling radio frequency. So, basically, done by the text, Microneedling would be reaching the epidermal epidermal junction, which is this layer here. Okay? And fractional lasers could cross all the way throughout the subcutaneous tissue. So for deep wrinkles, fractional lasers are the are the option. As I said, microneedling works well for superficial wrinkles. Yeah. Under eye wrinkles, improvement of pores. Again, one useful tool for that. It it it helps increase the delivery of substances. So when I use Macaneli, I always apply substances. Usually, I use it combined with the platelet rich plasma. Mhmm. What I do is I inject the rich fraction of the plasma, what contains the most amount of, growth factors. I inject it with a needle into the dermis, so on this layer. And then I use the platelet pore plasma as a topical agent after the microneedle. So I apply microneedling, and then on top, I apply the core fraction of, bladelets on top to increase absorption. Right. Is there any difference with, like, the Dermapen versus the home, microneedling device? The ROLLS? Yeah. Well, the difference is that Dermapen, penetrates the skin in in a vertical fashion like this, whereas the derma rollers scratch the skin. Mhmm. So they could potentially cause more scarring. Mhmm. I prefer, the microneedling devices. There are a few that you could potentially use at home, such as, the Nanopore Nanopore, it's called. It's a really it's, head with much smaller needles and much less deep needles that don't cause, skin trauma, but that create superficial epidermal channels to increase the absorption of your, let's say, your night serum or your moisturizer. Right. What about, like, these lasers and red light therapy devices? So, are those powerful enough to have any, like, effects? Oh, yes. They could be very powerful. So we should differentiate between ablative and non ablative lasers or light sources. IPL, for instance, is not laser. It's not coherent light. It's not one single wavelength. Basically, it's very strong light, like sunlight, really concentrated sunlight, where we put a filter, and that filter selects one type of, wide wavelength. So it's, an all in one device. It contains many lasers, many so called lasers. So ablative means that it causes burns. These type of treatments should only be used, in expert hands and for for really, specific purposes, not as a general tool for antiaging. So c o two laser is used for a type three to type four potter damage. It basically burns your skin, but not completely. It creates microchannels of, burns. It leaves separations of healthy skin that doesn't burn, which increases recovery. In comparison with phenol peels, it's a, it's the downtime is 25% that of the pill. So about one week, it takes to recover from a a CO2 laser versus a deep peel, which would take around a month. Much, much safer than deep peels. I use CO2 laser, but there's also Erbium, which is a different type of wavelength. So that's, to rejuvenate old skins and pretty damaged skins that cannot be tackled in any other way. Then we have the nonapplicised lasers or light sources. And here comes IPL. IPL stands for intense pulse light. It's a very good way to repair some damage like sunspots and also to treat skin conditions such as acne and rosacea because it can selectively heat different areas or different different elements of your skin. For instance, blood vessels. In rosacea, there's an increase in blood vessels. There's, an increase in capillarity. And IPL allows for a selected burn of those capillaries without burning the epidermis. Same thing with sunspots. You can burn the melanin inside the sunspots without burning skin, and you can also stimulate collagen with a different wavelength. So it does a photo rejuvenation. Again, very good, like microneedling for younger skin types, but anybody can benefit from that. It's just that it's not going to be enough for for advanced aging. Right. What else? So you mentioned red light. Red light, we should differentiate from red visible red light, which it would be in the spectrum of 60 600 sorry. 640 to 800 nanometers wavelength, and near infrared, which would be around a thousand nanometers. So red light is absorbed by the skin, epidermis and dermis. So far, studies have shown that it's able to reduce skin inflammation and stimulate collagen synthesis and stimulate the follicular stem cells in your scalp, to extend the the growth phase of your hair. It's very good for hair. Therefore, it's, very good for acne. It's very good for to aid in recovery after more invasive treatments such as CO2 lasers, ills, micro needling. It's going to reduce swelling. Mhmm. Near infrared light, on the other hand, I would deem it a good anti general antiaging, good therapy for longevity, but I'm not sure about skin because it it's more deeply absorbed. So it's going to have a bioregulatory effect on our cells, especially on the on the mitochondrial, metabolism. It's, been hypothesized to increase, to increase, respiration by mitochondria, so to increase the amount of, energy production from the mitochondria. And it may be useful if used in your whole body, such as, some sauna blankets that offer both wavelengths, the red one and the infrared one, and also some LED panels. Right. So they I'm not sure it it's, going to have any effect on on skin, but it might as well if it increases, skin metabolism. Right. What about, like, these face masks, these commercial few $100 of dollars with a red light and infrared? Well, there's been a few cases of burns reported with those face masks, but I don't know. I think some people may may misuse them. Mhmm. It will it will also it will really depend on the on the quality of the of the mask. So make sure that at least it's been an FDA cleared device or or that it has a CE mark if you're in Europe. On the other hand, the the supplier, the, the manufacturer should provide the exact wavelengths that that it emits. Mhmm. I wouldn't trust it if it doesn't. Same with, LED helmets for hair growth. Right. So if the wavelengths are right, then, is could have some benefits? It could. Definitely. Definitely. I I use face mask with my patients and, helmet after after the, injections to stimulate hair growth. Mhmm. So it it provides benefits, in my opinion, as a complimentary, treatment. Yeah. Makes sense. But under the other hand, like, this kind of artificial blue light, does that have, like, negative effects on the skin by causing, like, more oxidative stress to the skin cells? Artificial blue light from Screens and stuff. From screens. It causes photo damage, definitely. It it causes, it generates free radicals, and it cause total damage. But if you compare the intensity with the intensity of sunlight, it's nothing. So we might feel mostly of sunlight, and then on top of that, if you want to just, have the the perfect routine, you should also be wearing sunscreen indoors when when you're in under fluorescent light or in front of the screen. Mhmm. But that's less than 1% of what's going to influence your skin aging. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Like, you shouldn't In my in my mother's opinion. Yeah. Definitely. Yeah. Like, people avoid the artificial light, and then they go outside and not put sunscreen and Exactly. Exactly. And just caring about the the the 1%. So, but on the other hand, I wanted to mention that, certain blue light, wavelength have benefits for acne, acne prone schemes because they kill by oxidizing the the bacteria that cause acne. So there's two sides of the same coin. Yeah. It can it can provide some benefits in in certain clinical scenarios. Yeah. Absolutely. Like, everything and sunlight as well is good in certain amounts. Absolutely. I make restless. I recommend a bit sunlight for patients with acne, and I make sure that their vitamin d levels are optimal. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. It's like, you know, kind of everyone always goes into, like, extremes. Like, all sunscreen is bad or all suns all sunlight is bad or, vice versa. So it's, never that black and white. Exactly. Ten to thirty minutes of suns of sun in the morning, sunlight from, half past eight to maximum ten p 10AM, is going to give you benefits with minimal minimal, downsides. Mhmm. Yeah. What about, like, Botox? Like, that's very I think that's the most popular skin antiaging, treatments there is. Is it does it have any, like, negative health effects, or is it, like, harmful in any way to the actual skin aging, or is it mostly, like, just aesthetic? Botulinum toxins, if anything, they may provide some benefits, some psychological benefits apart from the the pure, mechanical blockage or chemical, in this case, blockage of the muscle of the of the muscle contraction. But there's a few studies in depression that those patients undergoing Botox injections required patients with major depression required lower doses of antidepressants than those that that did not receive it. And that's got to be because of some, action on the neurotransmitters, not just simply on the, looking good Mhmm. Aspect and improving your mood. Mhmm. So so there's there's a lot of room for for research in that topic. And as far as, I'm concerned, there's no negative effects whatsoever if used in therapeutic doses, which range from, ten to three hundred up to five hundred international units of botulinum toxins. And in my practice, I use it, just for, hypertonic muscles like forehead, labellae, periorvisal wrinkles. In some cases, the depressor angulioris, which some people have hypertonic, and that causes a rictus, that causes a sat based look. Also for the platysma bands, which some people tend to contract too much and create some, like, like folds in your neck that, make make you look more aged. And it can also, it's also used, for other for other clinical indications, such as excess sweating, migraines, hypertrophy of the of the masseter muscles, the mastication muscles, which sometimes causes dental fractures. I've seen that in some patients, and I've treated them with great success. So I think it the list of indications is growing by the day, and it's a very safe product if used adequately. There has not been any adverse effect reported from intravascular injection at these doses. So botulism would only appear with doses above two thousand international units applied simultaneously, applied in in one single in one single time. Right. Would would there be any benefits of so let's say, yeah, like, you're naturally going to experience skin aging. If you're really, like, serious about it, I've heard some people, like, do Botox preemptively kind of, not retroactively because, obviously, you're gonna be less effective if you're doing it when you already have, very big wrinkles and deep wrinkles. So is there any evidence that if you do it already before you have wrinkles or something, then you then you, I guess, delay the onset of, the wrinkles? It makes sense to have it when you have minor wrinkles at rest. So then you should start treating yourself to avoid, to prevent your muscles from gaining more strength and avoid deep wrinkles. But in my opinion, it makes no sense to start when your face is already perfect. So it will really depend on the person. Mhmm. I treated some I treated some men, young men, from ranging from from 20 to 25 years old, because they practice a lot of sports and they contract their face so much that they already have minor wrinkles at rest. But there's also people who at that age, don't need it. So it should it should be tailored to every person's needs. It does not prevent skin aging. Let's be clear. The only thing it does is prevent expression wrinkles. So it does not replace collagen stimulator stimulators or vitamin injections or growth factors or exosomes or peptides, which really do something for your skin. Yeah. Yeah. So, like, the stimulating the collagen production in the skin itself is going to actually reverse the skin wrinkles and aging, whereas the Botox is just, artificially, you know, making the seam that you don't have wrinkles. Well, it it does provide an aesthetic benefits, but an aesthetic benefit, but it sometimes masks your how aged your skin really is. Right. Yeah. So I would rather start treating the skin thinning with some collagen stimulator agents, or for example, exosomes or platelet rich plasma in the under eye area before injecting Botox. And most cases, we'll see an improvement and won't won't won't need Botox, for a few years. Yeah. You mentioned They they will be able to postpone the Botox injections. Yeah. And they will actually be doing some good to their skin in the long term. Yeah. You mentioned the exosomes. So, what are those? Like, they're also very, I guess, popular nowadays. What? Sorry. What come again? You mentioned the exosomes. So, can we talk about those? Mhmm. Yeah. Absolutely. Like I mentioned last time we met, exosomes are tiny vesicles secreted by every cell in the body. But the ones with, interest in regenerative medicine are those secreted by stem cells, either adult adult stem cells or fetal stem cells, like, those from the umbilical cord. And they contain several, signaling molecules, which mostly have an anti inflammatory effect, also stimulate mitosis, so stimulate, tissue turnover, and also regulate gene expression. So they seem to have a a genuine rejuvenating effect on on every tissue that they have been applying. In the skin, they improve thickness, they improve, skin skin bright or skin skin brightness, skin light, and they reduce the depth of wrinkles. And they they can somehow lift the skin a little bit, although they're not specifically used for that. But they they increase cognition in your dermis, so so they improve the the elasticity. Right. And it's one of those treatments people can typically do, like, at any time, with it's just gonna help with the skin health and the wrinkles. Definitely. Definitely. I like to combine them with amino acids, vitamins, minerals, and hyaluronic acid to synergize with those. Each each ingredient has a different effect. So let's say that I give the skin the building blocks for it to start creating more collagen, more elastin, and then I give it the instruction manual, which is the exosome or the or the growth factor where you to use those building blocks and start rejuvenation. Mhmm. Yeah. And, is it something you how often should you do it for the best effects, or is there some, like, you shouldn't do it that frequently or anything like that? So, like, anything, there's, there's, like, you go you ought to attain more effect by doing it too often than, let's say, four or five times a year if your skin is already in good condition. But if your skin is in poor condition and you want quick improvements, you can do an intensive protocol, which would be one session every month for at least three months, and then start with the maintenance, phase, which which would be every three to four months. And that's going to be enough to keep the skin stimulated. More than that, won't provide any any other benefit, and I'm not sure it's going to be harmful. But, potentially, it could, be too much of a stimulus. So we don't know. It's something it's it's a really advanced therapy. It's it's something that's in its early stages of of knowledge. Yeah. Interesting. PRP is also, like, very similar or not similar, but it's also, like, injectable and with similar effects. So It is similar. It is similar. It it lacks the the microRNAs, and it lacks it lacks it lacks it lacks the the lipids and other signaling molecules, but it contains the almost the same growth factors as most exosomes in different amounts. So PRP works well for, for young patients. I would not treat a 60 year old with with PRP because their blood probably does not contain as many quality growth factors as that of a of a young person. I prefer exosomes in that case. But it's, it's, interchangeable in most cases. It's useful for wrinkling. It's useful for discoloration, any type of photo damage, but it should not be used if you have any type of, cancerous or precancerous, damage in your skin. Mhmm. So first of all, put yourselves in in the hands of a good dermatologist or a good practitioner or a set practitioner who can diagnose what you have, indicate the right type of treatment to you. Don't just go straight for PRP if you've never done any any analysis before, any skin analysis. Yeah. So then it makes sense if you're young to do the PRP because you have more growth vectors in your plasma, than waiting waiting it until you're 50 years old when you get the wrinkles. Exactly. Although you could freeze your young blood and use it later on in life. Yeah. That's that's actually a good idea. Same with stem cells. Yeah. What about, like, moisturizers? So they're we've, I guess, glanced over them a little bit. Do you think it's a good idea to use a moisturizer daily? And are there any ingredients that are, like, more to look out for? Mhmm. Well, most sunscreens are already moisturizers. So in order to keep it simple, I would begin with a sun cream and see whether your skin needs any further assistance in terms of of moist or if it's already or if that need is already fulfilled with the with the sun cream. Don't don't complicate your routine too much. Basically, the the exceedance are the same in moisturizing creams and in sunscreens. So let's say that if you apply your suns your sunscreen twice or three times a day, you'd and you don't have enough, what should you do? So you should, first thing in the morning, clean your face. Again, remove any any, residue of, retinol that you, that you applied the night before. Then you should apply the moisturizer, preferably a serum. Again, phytoplankins, alpha, bisabolol. There's other substances, eupiduz nacho substances like aloe vera, which will help improve skin moisture and won't obstruct your pores. And then let it dry. Let it absorb. And after a few minutes, apply your your sunscreen. So you should only use the your moisturizer once a day. Well, for dry dry skin types, it's interesting to look up for look for, ceramides, but that's only for dry skins. So ceramides basically are a vegetable substance that replaces our own secretions when we don't have them or in the areas where our skin does not produce enough. And it basically creates an isolating layer from the from the environment. So ceramides, interesting for dry skins, Combination skins and and and oily skins should avoid them, should only use phytoplankton, parfabisapolol. And, if combined with vitamin c, even better. So if you use a serum that contains these moisturizing agents plus vitamin c in the morning, you will get an antioxidant boost. And, also, it will inhibit tyrosinase, which is the enzyme that helps melanin mature. It will prevent, sunspots. It's a natural way of of preventing sunspots. And, obviously, it's not going to be enough if you have already if you have already developed advanced forms of of sun damage, then you're going to need, bleaching agents at night. But for young people looking to prevent sun damage, it's a very, very good and safe option. What about the copper peptide that's, like, very popular as well as a skin and dating peptide? Mhmm. GHK copper. Yeah. It's a three peptide, that has regenerative properties. So it's both interesting for skin and for hair. It does something that minoxidil doesn't do, which is it promotes angiogenesis. So the new blood vessel growth, both in skin and hair, which is essential for tissue healing and repair, but also if you want to have a youthful skin, a bright skin, you need blood supply. And that's for set of skin aging, the loss of blood supply. So, GHK copper seems to promote that, and that's also essential for healthy air follicles. Also, it is anti inflammatory antioxidant, and it seems to have a mild antiandrogenic effect, so similar to a natural version of finasteride. Interesting. And, is it you can apply topically, or is it only injectable? No. No. It can be applied topically as a serum, preferably. And there's many products in the market. There's, greens as well, but the serum would be the the best approach for a transdermal delivery, both for the scalp and for the skin. And I would use it in the morning since it produces no photosensitivity as a base layer serum. Mhmm. It could be combined with vitamin c, which is also a a very, very interesting and helpful ingredient to fight skin aging. Right. Yeah. And, would it help like, if you do it after microneedling, does the peptide then reach deeper into the skin? It does, but I wouldn't do that because, my main concern in this in this approach would be that it's actually a blue dye, this peptate is blue. And if you apply it through microneedling, it might tattoo blue your skin. It's it's something unproven as far as I know, but, I would try to avoid that approach just as as a word of caution. Whereas if you inject it directly into the dermis in a in a height dilution, this this doesn't happen. Mhmm. I I usually inject it into the scalp, and I haven't seen any any discolorations. So the the best approach would be to inject it, at least for the scalp, because the hair follicle is really at at a at a at a depth inside the scalp. It's between five and ten millimeters, the serum might not be well absorbed at that depth. So, scalp and hair regrowth mesotherapy, best approach. Skin, it could be used as a serum, but it can also be injected from time to time as a as a way of boosting its effects. Mhmm. Gotcha. Right. In my in my hospital, I inject, GHV copper combined with vitamins and other active principles once every three months for someone who wishes to have a maintenance Mhmm. Of their skin quality. And as a more intensive protocol, it would be once a month for at least three months. Gotcha. Yeah. Same thing same thing for hair, actually. So It was for hair. If you if you're suffering from hair loss after the third intradermal injection, it usually stops. So you would do it, let's say, every year you start losing hair in October, November due to seasonal changes. You would do it starting in September all the way up until November. Interesting. And I've you know, there's a research about BPC and wound healing as well. Would it help with some skin light aging or something as well? DPC for skin, to my knowledge has no evidence at all, either in humans or in animals. So I wouldn't use it for that purpose. No. It's it's a stomach peptide. So, actually, it is interesting, but for gut health gut health, muscle and and tissue injuries, but not for for skin. Maybe for skin, chronic ulcers, it might provide some benefit. It might it might speed up regeneration of the ulcer since what BPC does is, it activates the growth factor the growth hormone receptors in peripheral tissues. Right. Another, like, popular serum is, like, the niacinamide, which, a lot of people use. So do you use that in your practice? I use it as a combination, therapy, never on its own. So it's not a strong active principle, but it's a very interesting one because it has two properties. One, anticancer, anti inflammatory and anticancer, and the other one, antiacneid. So first, it does reduce the the growth. It slows down the growth of actinic keratosis, which are precancerous lesions, so a form of sun damage that ends up developing skin cancer. And it it does reverse them up to a certain extent. So, I would use them combined with tretinoin and probably combined with more invasive approaches. For instance, c o two lasers, chemical peels, or dermabrasion. And then for the most superficial, lesions, I would use a cream with niacinamide used at night at high doses, at least three percent all the way up to five percent, and in combination with tretinoin. Because tretinoin also has proven to reverse actinic keratosis and sun damage. And on the other hand, for acne, it's very interesting because what it does is it reduces the the sebum secretion of the glands. Mhmm. So it's not an ideal comp an ideal substance, an ideal, in this case, vitamin, for dry skin. It would it would make your skin even drier. But for oily skin, it's a very interesting compound. Mhmm. It it reduces the the duration of the of the acne once you already have a an outburst. Mhmm. Gotcha. Right. And like I said, the last thing we could talk about is, like, supplements. Are there any, like, oral supplements that have skin antiaging benefits? Sure. So we we're talking of supplements that have been proven through have been passed I'm sorry. Supplements that have passed the test of time and that have accumulated, you know, scientific evidence. The list is quite short, but Right. I would start with collagen peptides because there's, at the moment, more than 9,000, clinical trials on on collagen. And it does seem to increase skin elasticity and reduce the depth of wrinkles. So it's interesting as long as it's, hydrolyzed Mhmm. So that so that we absorb the peptides. And something that people, should make clear of it is that this collagen does not get transported to the skin. This the peptides go to the liver, and the liver interprets these signals and sends the message to build this co new collagen, newly formed collagen, into into peripheral tissues among which are the skin, but not directly. Mhmm. So it's not a matter of, absorbing the whole molecule and sending it to the skin. It's it works similar similarly to, any other peptide. Mhmm. Yeah. Like single molecule. Mhmm. So first one, collagen, but it has to be hydrolyzed and as pure as possible. No differences between marine collagen, bovine, or porcine collagen. I would say it's a matter of preference. But, there's no vegan collagen. So in case, we have some vegans in our audience, I would recommend to take glycine and proline at high doses, five grams each every day, and those are the building blocks. So we must rely that our liver will use these two amino acids to make collagen, which, as far as I know, has no evidence, but that would be my recommendation for vegans. And for everyone else, I'm at work for personal preference. I take, bovine collagen because I find it less strong in taste compared to marine collagen. Yeah. But it also depends on the brand, of course. And I take it without, sweeteners and without any other, blends. Although, a good idea would be to mix it with, vitamin c and and some minerals. That's because vitamin c is the limiting factor for collagen synthesis. So if you are in the lower end on your vitamin c levels, you probably won't use up as much of those peptides to build new collagen because the body will prioritize the use of vitamin c for, your vital organs. Yeah. Makes sense. Anything else that you think Number two. Yes. And number two would be hyaluronic acid. And hyaluronic acid, has been shown in several meta analysis to increase skin hydration in an oral form, which is very interesting. We've known about that property for a long time. When we inject hyaluronic acid into the skin, it's noticeable after a few hours of the injection. But we could benefit also from from the oral approach, not just for our skin, but for our joints, because our joints need as much lubrication as possible, and hyaluronic acid behaves like a sponge. It retains water anywhere in the body. That's going to be that's going to be, that's going to be useful in terms of improved metabolism, improved intercellular signaling. But specifically for the skin, it would improve the appearance of wrinkles. It wouldn't it wouldn't erase or or or reduce wrinkles because wrinkles are caused by broken collagen fibers, but it would, let's say, moisturize them. It would, soften them up. Gotcha. Makes sense. And it's good for for the for the health of the skin tissue anyways. Yeah. And, it declines with age, this the hyaluron in the skin. Mhmm. Skin produces less hyaluronic acids in in the extracellular matrix, which basically promotes, the entry of more cells into senescence because they they won't receive nutrients. So we're talking about the epidermis. Okay? The epidermis has no blood vessels, so it relies on diffusion of nutrients from the dermis. The dermis has tiny blood vessels which receive oxygen and nutrient substances. And it it sends them through the extracellular matrix, which is, its main compound is hyaluronic acid. So without hyaluronic acid, let's say that the environment is too dry to send, nutrients to the epidermal cells, and therefore, the basal layer of the epidermal cell of the epidermis, sorry, does not produce new young cells that replace the older ones. So there's no skin turnover. Skin turnover happens at at a much slow, slower pace. Mhmm. Yeah. Therefore, the cells that remain there become senescent. Right. Azaxanthin is another one that's quite, popular for skin. Oh, I love Azteaxanthin. And I tend to recommend it to everyone in Spain because, we live in a sunny country. And, people are getting more conscious of using sun sunscreens all year round, but some of them have already accumulated a great deal of, sun damage. And astaxanthin is one of the very few supplements that can can reverse that. There's even evidence that it reverses actinic keratosis. So I would, I would say it makes a good combination to use topical niacinamide with oral astaxanthin. Depending on the degree of the damage, the doses would go from four milligrams to up to eighteen milligrams. For someone who already has had a history of skin cancer, I would go straight for eighteen milligrams. Orally, anytime of the day. You can take it on an empty stomach, or you can take it with food. Right. Try try to use natural sources of astaxanthin, so it should indicate it in your in your supplement label. It should say, from hematocochus glutealis because that's the one that's been most widely studied. Although there's a synthetic form that's cheaper, but most clinical trials have been done on the on the natural form. As the, as the real, for instance, is a a registered brand that contains the the astaxanthin from Imachococcus Pluvialis, but there's many others. Okay. Is oral niacinamide gonna have any effects on skin? Good question. I I don't think it has relevant effects because it's used up in so many other metabolic processes that it can barely reach the skin in a significant amount. Right. And I would not megadose any any form of vitamin b three. Yeah. Only NMN and for different purposes and only for aged individuals or if we want to, prevent cognitive decline in some in some specific individuals or chronic fatigue, etcetera. But not niacinamide or niacin. Yeah. Any other supplements? Not that I can think of. Well, maybe MSM, MSM methyl supronyl methane. But it has only been studied so far for up to six months, I think. So it could help improve, elasticity as it does in in joints and in tendons. So it works as an anti inflammatory and antioxidant on the connective tissue. That may be helpful, but, to my knowledge, it's the evidence is very preliminary. So, it's not something that I recommend on a daily basis. I would use it for osteoarthritis Right. To prevent, to prevent injuries in in, leads. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. I think that's, that's it then. Not a lot of supplements, but for sure a lot of, like, other things that people can do for for their skin. Other things. Well, I think I've mentioned most of it. I would I would pay a lot of attention to the way you clean your skin because you can irritate it. And as I mentioned and as I as I mentioned before, if you don't use the right pH, you're going to be causing harm to your skin. And the right pH should be acidic to to prevent the the hydrolytic layer of the skin from from breaking and to prevent excessive exposure to the environment of the skin. So, skin should be cleaned once a day with soap, with an acidic soap, and you should not use you should not abuse, I should say, exfoliating agents of any kind, especially if you are under treatment with retinol or any form of retinoids, such as tretinoin on my formulas, because, your skin is already exfoliated by these agents. And it I would I would advise that you treat your skin the way you would treat a baby skin because your skin actually looks more like, your structure looks more like that than to an adult or mature skin. So I think this is a good time to wrap it up. Thank you for all the information. Many people will learn a lot, and I understand a lot of lot of these treatments and things you also do at your clinic. So, where can people learn more about you and your work if they wanna work with you? Yeah. Well, they can find me in Barcelona. I'm I'm at at Astra Clinic. I I founded this antiaging longevity and regenerative medicine clinic, two years ago now. And they can look up my my Instagram profile or my website at astroclinic.com. The Instagram profile is at astroclinic. My personal Instagram is also very interesting. I post, a lot of content on general antiaging and preventive preventive medicine approaches and skin care. It's Alexis Ortega, MD. And and, yeah, it's it's been a pleasure to meet you again and and chat with you. It's it's my my passion. You know? So I love speaking. I love talking about this, and I look forward to doing so again in the future. Yeah. Likewise. It was a great talk, and, yeah, thanks for coming. I'll see you around. Thank you. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.