In 2016 there was a very popular video on YouTube about a vegan powerlifter who ate only one meal a day. I realized I never actually made a video about him back then but I wanted to see if he's still around so that's why I'm making this video. Meet doctor Noon Savasiva Amun Ra or as he likes to call himself the architecton. Greetings all. I am doctor Noon Savasiva Amun Ra the architecton. If you scroll through his Facebook page you get the vibes of an ancient Egyptian magician. You have different hieroglyphic scriptures, a scarab idol, a big magic staff, multiple wives, hooded meditations and a samurai katana. I think it's the wrong timeline. He's definitely a very interesting and mysterious character. Doctor. Amenra, he's not a doctor of some medicine, he's a doctor of public health so don't get confused with that. Amenra's main goal is anti aging and life extension. He eats one meal a day in the evening after lifting weights and he eats all vegan food. Now there's no information online about his exact age but in the 2016 video, he said he had been doing this protocol for fifteen years. So now in 2025, it would be twenty five years ago. At minimum, he's 45 years old and at maximum he could be 50. However, it's also hard to take his exact word on this because he reposts old images all the time and I've never actually seen specific photos of him twenty five years ago. So I don't know which part of his story is true. Here's a picture of him in 2010 and here's his physique of him in June 2025, fifteen years later. Now he has visibly lost some size as you can see from this picture. His skin is a bit more saggy and stretched out indicating that his arms and shoulders were bigger before. So he has lost muscle as he's gotten older which is normal or it might be the one minute they catching up on him after ten years. He is competing in the American drug free powerlifting federation. Now this would be a claim that he's natural and he's never taken any steroids but it's not. You can easily fake steroid tests by timing them perfectly. Lance Armstrong was doping for over a decade at Tour de France without getting caught before he admitted to taking performance enhancing drugs. And this smaller federation isn't going to come in your house at 3AM to get a pee test because the stakes aren't that high. Now, I do think that it might be possible that he's natural because he clearly has good genetics. But it's just very unlikely with his lifestyle and diet. Amen Ra definitely didn't grow into his muscle from this routine. He built his muscles and strength much sooner with probably a regular more conventional bodybuilding diet and potentially some performance enhancing drugs. And now he's just maintaining his strength with his one meal a day approach. I've also done one meal a day in the past, different versions of it, different eating windows, and what I found was that eating specifically one meal a day within one hour as Amun Ra does it is very difficult to build muscle and strength. I did it for over a year and I saw no improvements. Only after I introduced the second protein shake to my day, so I had two protein meals per day, I was able to start building muscle and strength. I don't think you need to eat six or even three meals a day to build muscle, but just single one meal a day is probably too hard. You need at least two meals. And I think all of Amen Ra's followers also have this problem. If you look online, then none of his devotees who practice his regimen look like him. None of them are as jacked and muscular as Amen Ra, which is not surprising. Alright. So let's take a look at what he's eating. It entails a daily fast of twenty three hours in duration, caloric restriction. That is, we consume approximately 1,000 to 1,500 calories a day. He basically eats one meal a day in the evening within one hour and drinks tea during the day. Here's what his meal looks like. Tomatoes, avocados, nuts, apples, mushrooms, seeds, herbs, etcetera. Here's another picture. Looks like rice crackers, dates or figs, tomatoes, presumably vegan cheese, dark rye bread, dark chocolate or cacao nibs, and nuts. And then there is the minor meal. And the minor meal is nothing more than a dessert. Typically, nuts, dried fruit, often what you might call peanut butter and jelly sandwiches or peanut butter and nesubot sandwiches. That doesn't look like a lot of calories which is true. That's because Amin Ra is deliberately eating only about 1,500 calories a day. He believes that extreme calorie restriction has life extension benefits, which it certainly has been shown to do in animals. And because the human body is so adaptive, your body can get used to a lower calorie intake over time. So you can maintain muscle mass on a very low calorie diet. Now he does appear to be drinking some amino acid drink that he calls the elixir, which is essentially a mix of essential amino acids like leucine, isoleucine, glutamine, as well as creatine, and protein powder. The first thing we consume when we break our twenty three plus hour fast is what I call the Amin Amino Elixir, consisting of three protein sources, soy, spirulina, brewer's yeast, and ideally a dozen isolated amino acids. His workouts are mostly focused on powerlifting with some accessory exercises. He often posts videos of himself doing deadlifts where he's sitting there in silence, seemingly meditating, and then he goes and lifts the bar. He also does a few accessory exercises like bicep curls or delt flies and some weighted balance exercises. What's my overall impression of Amin Ra? I think he's, you know, certainly very interesting and mysterious, but he's also strange and I don't know if he's, you know, taking himself too seriously. I'm not sure if he's faking his magician persona because he listens to, like, rap music while lifting weights, which isn't very spiritual of him. Now, I do think that he actually follows his lifestyle, that he does eat one meal a day and he lifts every day etcetera. Maybe he eats more calories than that, maybe he has an additional amino acid drink or more protein during the day, I don't know. This is the part that I don't really trust him about. He does sell his books, which are crazy expensive, 300 to $400 each, but I can't imagine he's making a lot of money off them because he doesn't have that big of a following. 14 k on Facebook and 16 k on YouTube. What I do think is that 95% of people wouldn't be able to follow this regimen and they wouldn't get the same results as Amin Raw would. That's because he built his muscle and strength before starting the one meal a day protocol. He was a bodybuilder and power lifter way before he started his Amenra protocol and now he's just maintaining the muscle because he's not getting bigger and he's not getting that much stronger. The most beneficial lessons you can take away from Amenra is that lifting weights and more strength starts training is good for preserving muscle mass as you age and it supports metabolic health. I do agree with him about intermittent fasting. I think it's better to eat less than three meals a day rather than six or four meals a day. Now animal research hasn't suggested that intermittent fasting is superior to regular calorie restriction in terms of life extension and human research shows that intermittent fasting isn't superior for weight loss to regular calorie restriction either if the calories are the same. Independent fasting only supports life extension if you eat along the circadian rhythms, but amen ra actually eats at night which is probably not the most optimal. If you are doing intermittent fasting then you shouldn't eat too close to bed and if you have an earlier dinner you probably sleep better if you sleep better you have better health. I agree with the idea that consuming different dietary polyphenols, herbs and spices, and teas is good for you because they mimic calorie restriction and fasting to a certain extent. Next, he appears to be deliberately trying to slow down his metabolism by lowering his body temperature, lowering his calorie intake, and not wasting energy on unnecessary movements. That's why you see him walking and talking so slowly. Now, there is some research that lower calorie intake in animals extends lifespan, but it's not clear if it applies to humans. And at the end of the day, you need to think about what kind of life do you want to live. Do you want to be eating 1,500 calories or 1,200 calories for the rest of your life? Hoping that it's going to add maybe three to five years to your life. Because that's the most that you can expect from this. Amenra's protocol isn't going to make him live ten, twenty, fifty years longer. It might add only three to five years to his life. To extend our lifespan by twenty, thirty, forty, fifty years, we need some new type of technology such as gene editing or some other medicinal therapies that we don't know about yet. We need to discover them within the next few decades. So, yes, maintaining good health and doing calorie restriction can improve your health right now, but it's not going to extend your life by decades. If you're looking for a realistic longevity routine that everyone can follow, then check out this video next.