And on that subject, we might come back to it now. I don't know. What are the most underappreciated or underrecognized yet promising gero protectors in your opinion? Yeah. I think taurine might be one of those examples. There's actually quite quite a lot of research about taurine's effect on metabolic health and blood pressure plus some exercise, performance, benefits. Compared to, like, the the cost and, the safety, then it's pretty underappreciated. I mean, touring's excellent. Yeah. I'll go a different direction. I'm kinda torn actually between two. I would go You get two choices, Nick. Oh, I get two choices. I'm never no longer torn. In that case, I would I would go curcumin. I've been doing a lot more research on curcumin and I've been doing, research on blood sugar, how it helps people with prediabetes, diabetes. Also it seems to have some pretty profound effects on osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis. My vote goes to curcumin. The other one is a combination supplement, so hopefully you'll allow this, Master Greg. But lutein and zeaxanthin are pretty high up. They're not ones that are discussed that much except in the ocular community, which we are big fans of. In terms of the studies on lutein and zeaxanthin, they seem to be really effective. I mean, there's plenty of clinical trials that show improvements in eye health. And just because of the nature of the molecules, they also seem to affect the brain. At least lutein, I've seen some evidence for. I'll go with those two slash three, molecules that are underappreciated. That's a I I like lutein and zeaxanthin as well. And the second one for me would be Azteaxanthin, which is also a carotenoid. The lifespan data is quite interesting. It has skin protective effects against UV radiation. It has, like, some metabolic effects and has been seen to lower inflammation in clinical trials, but it has not the main, I guess, effect. It's mostly for the skin. Probably has some brain benefits as well as a carotenoid. I'm a fan of all of those. My choices would probably be lycothioneine and glucosamine sulfate. What about underrated or under recognized medications? I think GLP one receptor agonists, some people are really into them. And then other people think drug equals bad, so therefore try to avoid it at at all costs. And I think that the data is incredible in relation to those. So I think that they're for a a large group of individuals that are extremely reticent to, jump on any sort of drug. If the label drug or pharma is associated to it, they will not touch it. I would say that's a bad move in a lot of circumstances. Maybe not every circumstance, but in a lot of circumstances because they can help with blood sugar regulation, weight, triglycerides, LDL, everything. It covers so much. So and it can really help people that are that are really struggling with, with making sure that they're consuming the appropriate foods and the appropriate amounts. And there's actually even some research in relation to its effects on the brain that it can, change how people perceive, let's say, junk food. That would be my choice. Even though plenty of people know about it, I think I don't necessarily know if they appreciate the potency and the overwhelming positive effects that come with them. Yeah. I think the kind of negative side effects are a bit overhyped, and they're, like, quite manageable with, like, diet and, resistance training and those just general healthy lifestyle principles. It's relatively safe. Nick, I find it ironic that a lot of those people who are anti drugs and anti medications are also keen caffeine consumers. Methylene blue. Yeah. And then regarding the GLP-one receptor agonists and food intake, that seems to be true of addiction in general. There are these studies ongoing now looking at things like addiction to nicotine and whether they might be used for that context. And then seem regarding blood pressure medications. I think they're a really interesting choice. And it raises an intriguing tangent, which is about substances that directly target the biology of aging or things that tick people off prematurely. So in this case, cardiovascular disease being a huge killer. And my choice would be quite similar to yours. Initially, these drugs were developed as blood pressure lowering medications, but I'd probably choose PDE5 inhibitors like sildenafil and tadalafil, Viagra, or Cialis. Sildenafil, interestingly, is being studied in the ITP now as a candidate for gerotherapeutic. People do seem to live longer when they take them in part due to lower rates of cardiovascular disease, and they seem to have some very protective effects in the brain too, which surely relates in part to vascular function. But there are data associating their use with lower risk of Alzheimer's disease. Well, actually, they're one of my joys choices of thinking Viagra and Cialis because, yeah, like, with age, men men's, you know, their reaction quality declines, blood flow declines, and DIPD five inhibitors, they support blood flow through nitric oxide, and they also lower blood pressure. So, yeah, a lot of cardiovascular benefits and sexual benefits for 80 years old. Effects on quality of life in general. If you've got a romantic relationship, then that's gonna be good for you and have some indirect positive actions on your health.