You're in this fight or flight state all the time. You're holding on to things. Your tissues are tough. Your tissues are are just ready for, you know, some sort of, response to a threat. It doesn't allow us to rest, digest, and eliminate. And when we get locked into that sympathetic dominant state, our body holds on to things. And that bioaccumulation is ultimately what leads to the damage that could be accumulated on a DNA level. It could lead to chronic inflammation, and that chronic inflammation could lead to immune dysregulation and all sorts of things. Anil, welcome back to the show. Thank you, Sam. Great to see you. Yeah. I'm, happy to have you back on the show. And the last time we had, you know, got a more general overview about precision medicine on how your genes and your environment affect your health each to each individual, separately. But, I wanted to bring you back to talk about something that is, more and more relevant in today's world, which is, toxin exposure and detoxification, etcetera, where you're living in a very, let's say, polluted world nowadays, both in terms of the environment as well as the food supply. And a lot of people appear to have, struggles, with, these kinds of things. So, yeah, we'll do, like, a master class on all things, detoxification. And I wanna start with maybe you giving your framework or opinion about detoxification as a phenomenon in itself because I think people might have the idea that it's kind of a scam or some sort of a fraud fraudster thing that drink your detox smoothies and those kinds of things that it's, just, you know, not pseudoscience, that it's not an actual thing. So what is your take on it as a presumed medicine doctor? That's a great question. And thank you again for having me back on. I think this is a very important topic, because what it relates to is essentially looking at the exposome, the human exposome refers to, you know, the entire amount of environmental factors that are coming into interface with our, our own internal ecosystem. So the air we breathe, the food we eat, the water we drink, all those factors have a significant impact at exposing us to different forms of environmental, exposures. And those exposures could be, you know, found in multiple different forms from different sources. The statistics around the environmental, kind of EPA and the chemical exposures have grown significantly over the past twenty years. So we're living in a very toxic world. We have this very unique little bubble, you know, I call it our little, you know, bubble that we're constantly being inundated with different forms of exposure, whether it's PFAS and these forever chemicals, from Teflon products and derivatives to microplastics, organophosphates with different pesticides and herbicides, phthalates, and parabens, which are found in our cosmetic products and our different cleaning products and things of that nature. All of those things have a significance on our total environmental exposure and that burden could lead to, you know, inundating our detox pathways and channels. So, you know, and that goes back down to your genetic blueprint. And it's almost like looking at it in the context of pharmacogenetics, which refers to how your DNA blueprint influences the rate of metabolism of certain drugs and toxins. So with that being said, there's some individuals that are rapid metabolizers. There's some individuals that are slow metabolizers and that, you know, gene environmental interface and or mismatch is where it leads to the potential for the bioaccumulation of these different compounds within our system. And that bioaccumulation is ultimately what leads to the damage that could be accumulated on a DNA level, right? It could lead to chronic inflammation. And that chronic inflammation could lead to, you know, further, you know, accumulation and immune dysregulation and all sorts of things. So we live in a very toxic world. There's multiple different exposures that we have, you know, that we're constantly being ex you know, inundated with and it's identifying and mitigating those exposures and supporting our body's natural endogenous detox pathways. Yeah. Yeah. It's like we live in an environment and, some of us will be more affected by these, environmental pollutants, due to genetics. And one great example of this is, me and my wife. I lived in a molded house for two decades without any symptoms and without any change in how I feel or anything of that. Whereas my wife, came and within a few, weeks, she already developed some symptoms related to mold, exposure. So there is a lot of, you know, individual differences to how people react to various, you know, toxins, like even microplastics or PFAS and, heavy metals and all those things are very, you know, dependent of, the individual genetics. But, yeah, I guess people already know that we are living in a very polluted world with a lot of, problems in the food supply, as well as the air that we breathe and the water we drink. But is detox itself a thing that our bodies are able to do? So that can we actually excrete these different pollutants and toxins, And is it just related to your liver? So a lot of people might say that your liver is the detox organ and that's all you have, that you can't really do anything else. If you can detox things, then it's gonna be done by the liver and that's it. Yeah. So I think that's a great question. And it's one that's kinda plagued me through my academic training, historically, because you speak to other doctors and they're gonna be like, oh, they're, you know, the concept of detox is kind of foreign to the allopathic language and landscape, especially from a conventional toxicology perspective, this concept of detoxing and drinking a smoothie or, you know, doing, you know, I don't know, colon cleanses and all this other stuff for for detox is kind of a foreign concept. And it just depends on what literature you're looking at and what research you're choosing. And I say choose to pay attention to because when it comes down to it in the, with our current understanding of N of one medicine and basically how everybody's unique blueprint is different. Our environmental exposures, like you alluded to, hey, I lived in a mold infested home for twenty years. I didn't have those symptomatic presentations versus Inka when she was there, she's automatically started expressing signs and symptoms of mold toxicity. You know, I think that's the, the, what we need to be looking at is that environmental gene interface and how that influences everybody differently. So to sit here and, you know, and have a conversation around detox, it's very important to understand the different factors that make up phase one, two, and three detoxification. Because each phase is very unique and specific to the individual with arguably, yes, the liver being one of the primary organs of detoxification, but so is the bowels, the urinary systems, and the kidney. Right? And even sweating in the lymphatic system, all of those different organs and systems play an instrumental role with the bio transfer transformation and elimination of these, various metabolites. Because again, if you understand the cytochrome p450 and again, using the context of pharmacogenetics and looking at how we're metabolizing things based on a rate of metabolism, right? And understanding even phase one detox, which has to do with basically, the turning these fat soluble or water soluble toxins into a more neutral, molecule after cytochrome p four fifty through, you know, you know, reduction process. That's a very important concept to look at because there's so many different nutritional cofactors that go into that phase one detox, including that cytochrome p four fifty blueprint that everybody is different, right? They're either slow or rapid metabolizers or intermediate and each, you know, TD6, 3A4, 1A2, whatever the heck it is, you know, everybody's blueprint and rate of metabolism for these different compounds are different. So understanding your unique genetic, blueprint is as instrumental at identifying specifically, you know, hey, do I have, you know, issues with, mold? Do I have issues with organophosphates? Do I have issues, more issues with heavy metals, right? From a phase one detox perspective, because after phase one detox and they basically hydroxylate these different, compounds and they try to make these heavy metals or, you know, whatever it is, chemicals more water soluble, sometimes those post phase one intermediate metabolites are more toxic than the actual toxin to begin with. And then, you know, after the phase one detox pathway, we have to look at phase two, conjugation, acetylation, methylation, glucuronidation, you know, those con conjugated pathways that influence the further, refining of that intermediate metabolite into a more, safer elements for detoxification. And then phase three, you know, is it gonna go to the urine? Is it gonna go to the, to the bowels? It, you know, is it, you know, not being conjugated appropriately and there's enter hepatic recirculation and that kind of that enter hepatic recirculation is a big issue with mold toxicity. So what enteropatic recirculation refers to is that, you know, these, these metabolites, go into the bile, the gallbladder and the bile, right? And the bile is squirted into the small intestine and you, you know, and the bile is what gives, feces its brown color, but at, you know, up to 98% of bile is recirculated and reabsorbed throughout the digestive process. Right? And that, that process of enteropathic recirculation could lead to these different toxins to be accumulated and recirculated within the system. And this is where different binders come into play to help, you know, work as a molecular sponge and go in there and soak this stuff up and help you eliminate it and poop it out. Right. To prevent, you know, that, that toxic vicious cycle of recirculation. So when it comes down to detox, I, you know, to question whether or not it's a real phenomenon is very silly to question the role of bio transformation, detoxification, elimination, I think breeds a larger conversation about, you know, are you moving your lymph and exercising and sweating? Are you passing your bowels on a regular basis? Not once a day, once every other day, you know, but maybe multiple times a day. Right. And what what's your urine look like? Are you drinking enough water to go in there and support, you know, the the flushing effect of, some of those water soluble toxins from the kidney system and network, right? And then even from like a German, homotoxicological model, you know, I'm really big into Doctor. Rekowitz work in homotoxicology. And he proposed this concept of, homotoxins that base, and he has this beautiful chart, would love to pull it up and share, but, you know, you could Google the chart and look up Rekowitz model of homotoxicology. And he has these different phases of detoxification and elimination in the system. And Rekowig was a, homotoxicologist in the 1950s in Germany that basically proposed this model. And in this model, it basically outlines whether or not you could appropriate bio transform some of these compounds in your system. And essentially he divided into multiple different phases. And when the first phase he described was a humoral phase, right? And the humoral phase referred to, basically the humors of the body, the, you know, the fluids of the body. And if you can't, you know, remove, the homotoxin appropriately, your body's gonna inflate. And if the body inflames, ultimately then it could, you know, and there's recirculation of those inflammatory, intermediate byproducts, it impregnates the tissue. And once there's impregnation of that intermediate metabolite into the tissue, right? And this could be toxic tag alongs and different metabolites or whatever it is from, detox intermediate byproducts. It moves into the matrix phase. And in the matrix phase, it's actually it's stored, Right. And then it leads to architectural shifts in that extracellular matrix in the bioaccumulation of some of those products. Right. And then ultimately it moves into a cellular phase where that accumulation of toxic compounds leads to dedifferentiation, which is essentially autoimmune and cancer. Right? So this bioaccumulation of these different compounds and it's an intermediate that could be more toxic than the actual, you know, you know, element itself could lead to long term consequences and cellular de differentiation towards auto immune and cancer. So, you know, it's a very important concept. I think, you know, in German medicine and German new medicine, you know, they look at supporting what's called drainage, right? And that drainage, you know, has to deal with opening up the different channels, you know, in the system to further help eliminate, allow the body to eliminate, these different kinds of byproducts. And that's your, you know, your different kind of, German remedies, you know, pecan and so forth. Trade and drugs. Yeah. It's in today's world. People are in a greater need of, eliminating these, compounds from their body because the input is so much greater. And, I would also, you know, argue that the modern lifestyle is, deficient in stimulating these detox pathways, sufficiently. So we are not sweating as much. We're not moving as much. We're not stimulating the lymph as much, or at least, you know, the average person, doesn't. And, their liver isn't working optimally. They might have a liver impairment to a certain degree. So there's a, like a deficiency in detox, for lack of a better word, that, when the input of these toxins is so much greater and the output, the excretion of them isn't catching up. And that's why you, will also people might also develop certain of these complications related to the toxic buildup. Even if it's, something related to as simple as, fatigue or sleep problems or some rashes, some skin conditions, autoimmune minor autoimmune conditions. You know, the even these minor things can be tied to, this toxin accumulation to a certain extent, and, some of them are directly also linked even to things like fertility issues and potentially cancer as well. Doctor. You said, so the clinical manifestations and symptomatic presentations could vary based on the allostatic load or bioaccumulation due to the lack of bio transformation or detox and could ultimately just manifest in everybody a little bit differently, right? Wherever those sore spots are, whatever it is, skin, neurological, mitochondrial deficits and fatigue, neuro fatigue, neuro inflammation. All of those are clinical manifestation signs and symptoms associated with, you know, that total toxic body burden due to that allostatic load and that environmental gene mismatch. Absolutely. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices, which are the one charge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes. They do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin antiaging, hormone optimization, pain management, and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes, especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the Bond Charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most regular Therapeuticers don't have the right wavelengths of light, which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Boncharge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research, and they also have a near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code SIIM, s I I m, for a 15% discount. Yeah. And you mentioned, certain of these, pathways and let's say routes of detox as well, such as sweating and urination and feces and and lymph drainage. These things are actually very, you know, everyday things that people do. Everyone goes to the bathroom every day and, everyone, you know, sweats at least to a certain extent a little bit. And, people don't really think as sweating or urination as a as a detox pathway, but it is, like you said, very important and, actually one of the major pathways, by which your body excretes a lot of these, toxins. So what are maybe we can start with what are some maybe these everyday activities that people should work on optimizing these simpler things, low hanging fruit, that, would support lowering that toxic burden on a daily basis. And, you know, we're not gonna go into these more genetic details yet, but some are more, like, simplistic things. So how can how can people, you make sure that they're urinate enough or, stimulate the lymph enough or, what's a sufficient amount of sweating, for example? That's a great question. I think it's all n of one based on, you know, where you live, the lifestyle that you have. Because arguably, you know, going for a run-in a city like New York or DC or LA, where the air impact, you know, outdoors, and the air quality is so bad that in certain areas, right, that it, that could actually be more detrimental. Right. So looking again, you know, at the actual kind of, spatial exposures and how that influences, you know, everything is very important. So, you know, is there a correct recipe for the person? That's a great question. And I think that, number one, I think most, most importantly is identifying and mitigating and removing sources of exposure to that toxin first and foremost. Right. Because we don't know what we're being exposed to unless you test. Right. And there's different forms of testing out there, provoke tests versus, you know, spontaneous tests. Usually urinary metabolites is blood better than, you know, urine and, and so on and so forth. And I think each one could be debated and has its clinical validity and utility in addressing n of one, you know, kind of clinical management. So number one, what what's our greatest threat? And obviously we could do our best to filter our water and, you know, make sure we're hydrating on great quality water, you know, and, whether it's filtered, double reverse osmosis, alkalize and, you know, there's all sorts of different, you know, is it deuterium removed, you know, from it? There's all these different things with water. Then the food, right? You know, organic, inorganic and, you know, basically hormones in the meat and antibiotics in the meat as well, you know, so it's being mindful of, of those accumulate, exposures. Not to mention, you know, our, our, you know, EMFs are a big part of it, right? This distorted factor, right? That is a part of our exposome. Right? And, you know, if we're bathing in EMFs in our bedroom, not good. The Austrians, there's, a great company in Austria called GeoVital that basically, trains individuals to identify major sources of EMF exposures in their home and in their office, wherever, where they spend a lot of time. And they basically provide tools and resources to mitigate that electromagnetic field stress. I feel as though the Austrians are really ahead of their time when it comes down to, geopathic stress and looking at how, you know, EMF plays a role. You know, our cleaning products, our our cosmetic products, phthalates and pyramids, all those things are are really big things. You know, our cookware huge, you know, with, Teflon and nonstick. So first and foremost, we need to do a, an audit of what's coming into our exposome, what we're being, you know, exposed to. And actually, you know, my, my, me and the American Board of Precision Medicine represent a new initiative here in The US called the Human Exposome Project, which is basically kind of picking up where the Human Genome Project left off twenty five years ago and looking at how the, that environmental gene interface and how that influences things. So, you know, I think number one is identifying those exposures, mitigating and removing chronic exposure. Number two, what could you do, you know, to help facilitate detox? That's a loaded question. You know, it depends on what we're being exposed to. You know, if you wanna go to the, the whole concept of mold toxicity, and I know there's like the saying out there, kill, bind, sweat, you know, you don't really sweat out mycotoxin. You know, that's, you know, kind of, you know, something. So it just really depends on what your total toxic body burden is, what it shows and how to address each one of those kinds of components, in a targeted fashion through targeted detox. Generally speaking though, what could you do at home right now from a lifestyle standpoint on top of, you know, mitigating exposure would be drinking enough water per day, you know, and honestly that amount and concentration could vary from person to person. What I tell people to do is just look at their urine, right? Look at, look at your urine. You don't want to concentrate it. You don't want to see bubbles. You don't want to see it, cloudy. Right? You want to see a nice straw colored urine. Right? That could be vary from day to day based on physical activity, stress, exposure, and sweating. In regards to sweating, what's the magic recipe? I don't think I haven't seen any studies done specifically to identify the specific sweating concentration or amount. Go out there and move. Right. Break a sweat. Right. Have fun with it. You know, you know, whether it's, playing a sport or doing, you know, martial art like jujitsu or, you know, being in a sauna, you know, to help mobilize some of this stuff out of your system. Fantastic. Go and sweat. You gotta sweat. You know, I do sauna therapy at minimum, you know, three to five times a week. Another very important thing to consideration is fiber. Are you pooping enough? You know, and, do you know how many patients I have? Normal thyroid function, normal ish diet and all that other stuff, but they don't poop on a regular basis. Right? And when you start unpacking the microbiome association, they have some microbes that are associated with dysbiosis that could be affecting that. They have maybe sympathetic dominancies in their their vagal nerve tone, right, or lack thereof that's influencing the migrating motor complex of their myenteric plexus of their gastrointestinal system that slows down bowel motility. Right? We have patients that might have some thyroid issues, but poop, man. That's, that's fun stuff. You want to make sure you're pooping a lot enough. You don't want diarrhea. You want, you know, a normal cadence of bowel movements, you know, two to three times a day to be keeping up with, you know, your your normal digestive physiology and the type of stool matters, you know, and that there's a whole Bristol stool chart where you can look at, you know, is it hard and rocky or is it, mushy and stuff? All those things are clinical clues on what's happening in the digestive process, the microbiota, bowel elimination and so forth. Because when you start taking fiber, watch what happens. The fiber goes in there, you know, feeds short chain fatty acids needed for the microbiota and the mucin production on the colonocytes and supports a healthy eubiosis, gut terrain. Things start working better. Elimination starts working better. So, you know, I can't stress pooping enough and appropriately. All right. And then lymphatic mobilization is critical. Right? So what do you do for that? You know, you guys gotta run, gotta exercise. You gotta rebound and jump on a trampoline. You could jump rope, you know, and infuse some sort of, movement that's going to, you know, kind of, you know, moving, that's going to stimulate the lymph as a whole, right? In my office, we have a machine called Flowpresso from New Zealand, FDA registered, machine that's been shown to do whole body lymphatic sequential, compression. I love it. It is like a nice warm hug. You know, you see these folks out there that are using like just the leg stuff, you know, the leg sensors right in their recovery. That's cute. But the bulk of our lymph nodes are actually concentrated in the abdomen, the renal region, you know, the epitrochlear lymph nodes, you know, in, in our arms. Right. And then we have some other lymph nodes around, you know, axillary lymph nodes and our thoracic duct, all of that lymphatic stimulation needs to be addressed appropriately. And once you start mobilizing the lymph, you need that's when you should sweat. So mobilize the lymph in some shape or form and then sweat. Right? So you sweat. You, you're gonna just recircle some of that stuff into your system and that's not good. And then you hydrate, you know, I love hydrating rehydrating on coconut water, you know, love it. You know, so I think that's a part of a healthy routine and not to mention sleep. Do you know when stuff is removed into your system in sleep? Right. And with the lymphatic system, I don't know if you, I know, you know, all about the lymphatic system and basically it's a, you know, a part of our lymphatic system within the central nervous system that goes in there and actually works as a hydraulic pump within our cerebral spinal fluid to wash away any of these bioaccumulated misfolded proteins that might accumulate in the brain. So lymphatic mobilization clearance is very big part of this entire process as well to pull away some of those bioaccumulated proteins. So sleep optimization is critical. And then, you know, eating for detox, right? You know, there's some evidence about cilantro, having some mild chelation benefits, beets, you know, yucca, you know, having some additional binding effects, you know, so there's different foods that can help support, you know, the detox pathways. And for that, you know, I like to reference, one of my colleagues, Deanna Minnick's work, you know, eating across a rainbow and spectrum of different colors of phytonutrients. Because again, those phytonutrients play a very important role at supporting some of those epigenetic, epinutrient signals needed for favorable gene expression, supporting detox and elimination. So Yeah. Yeah. I hope I answered your question. Yeah. No. That was a amazing, Oreo. Super, fascinating and, specific. So, I guess the perfect routine you use that on a daily basis, you do some sort of movement, specifically movement that would stimulate your lymphatic system. And the best form of that is something related to compression or, bouncing like, running, jumping, rebounding. Okay. So foam rolling or, this dry brushing or massaging would also count as a lymphatic drainage routine. So you need to, like, move the lymph and, hydrate properly, eat sufficiently enough fiber that you would, go for number two on a regular basis, which I think is very underappreciated that people would say that, okay, fiber is useless, that it's not an essential nutrient. Yeah. But, in today's world, your toxic burden is so much higher that you probably need to go for number two a little bit more often as well to, you know, bind to even like air pollution. Like you can't, you could live the most purest lifestyle, but if you're in a close and close by to some bigger city, then, you will be exposed to more air pollution, justify that. So, yeah. Fiber intake, is underrated in that regard and, sleep optimization with, with everything related to that. We're not going to go into details of that, but just, you know, going to bed on time, blocking out the artificial light and, sleeping in the darkness. All those things would help with melatonin production as well, which which I think is also involved in, these, pathways related to, detox. Yeah. The chronobiology of it's very, you know, interesting because, you know, arguably, you know, based on different, clock gene activation, there's different organ tissues, a part of our detox pathways that have heightened, you know, expression, you know, with, I think the liver, you know, being mostly associated around two, 03:00 in the morning from my understanding. So, you know, mitigating, the different, air pollutant or light pollution, you know, to optimize or minimize that, the suprachiasmatic nuclei reflection on those photoreceptors on the eyelid to optimize melatonin productions could be essential at, you know, getting some of those chronobiological, signalings, orchestrated appropriately. So the chronobiome is a whole nother, you know, very fascinating topic of, you know, bioregulatory, you know, kind of, support. So yeah. Yeah. You mentioned the water. So, mineral water contains a lot of different minerals Yeah. That, support your glutathione production, like sulfur and, etcetera. Do you I I have seen some evidence from some, smaller studies from Europe that, you know, bathing in mineral water, like the sulfur baths and, drinking mineral waters, you know, first of all, they do help with constipation and bowel movements, but, they might also actually help to excrete some heavy metals. Have you seen any evidence like that? I have not seen evidence about mineral water specifically, and, you know, the things that you just, you know, for me naturally, I love, you know, spring water that's naturally mineralized. Right? It feels so it's incredibly hydrating, alkalizing and supporting to the cells. But minerals play a very important role in, you know, the detox process, because as you're mobilizing stuff out of your system, you need to replenish, you know, the mineral storage that's being depleted or also, you know, the good leaving with the bad, so to speak, right? And doing multi mineral complex is very important in, you know, heavy metal detoxes, You know? So if we find somebody with, you know, a high burden of mercury, lead, or arsenic, whatever it is, and you decide to move towards a targeted detox approach with some level of you know, it doesn't have to be intravenous chelation, but, you know, whatever it is, heavy metal support, you know, there's oftentimes a multimineral complex that's there to help with that ionic exchange to help your body shed and release some of these, you know, trivalent cations that have very strong affinity to very, specific tissue. It all boils down to charge again, you know, and, looking at certain binders, you know, certain binders have charge, you know, like for example, the drug and medication cholestyramine, Wellcol, which is used in a lot of these mold detoxes, that is a, you know, very specifically charged particle, right? It's a quaternary ammonium and has a specific charge of binds to the mycotoxins and helps eliminate it out. And it's, very well established that that is a very strong binder that targets mycotoxins and prevents them. And your hepatic microcirculation mentioned the sulfur baths. And I think about, you know, there's, a resort near me here in West Virginia, four hours away called the Greenbrier. And the Greenbrier is very beautiful resort. They have this whole crazy underground kind of, system that was, you know, linked to DC and used as a, you know, kind of a place for people just in case there's like a nuclear fallout to go to it and bunker down. But the Greenbriar out in West Virginia has amazing sulfur springs and you go there and you do a sulfur baths. And then when you're actually at the Greenbrier, you see, you know, along the walls, very old school, all the theoretical clinical benefits of curing rheumatological issues and treating all sorts of different issues. If you, if you have this disease come and soak in the bass, the sulfur bass, it's gonna be a cure cure all. And again, there's these natural hot pockets of sulfur springs all over the world. And, you know, arguably have some level of therapeutic, benefits, you know, as a part of the, you know, the, the elimination process, same thing with like an Epsom salt bath, you know, driving magnesium into the tissue, you know, for for muscle reaction and recovery. I do think those baths, different forms of hydrogen baths, sulfur bath, and so forth, all have, you know, some therapeutic, benefit. Yeah. And if not, it feels fun. You know, it relaxes the autonomic nervous system and it lets you release. Yeah. In the past, that was the, one of the main medical interventions that people in Greece and, medieval Europe and even during the Renaissance and the Victorian era, they just told people to go to these, spas, which, were just, you know, mineral baths in in nature. And, I don't know, anecdotally, they appear to work for some conditions. And there are, like, some studies as well seeing that they provide some, relief, especially even for, like, pain management, especially like joint pains and those things, appear to be most beneficial. Yeah. The certain springs in Budapest and so forth, you know, are also a part of, you know, having those, healing properties and look, you know, are we going to be able to, you know, tell you to go take a spring bath and that's going to cure your cancer? No, but it could be a part of like the healing process, you know, and, you know, if not, how many people actually take baths on a regular basis or showering. Right. And being able to take the time to slow down, unplug, leave the phone off, light a candle, right. And sit down and calm the nervous system down in a therapeutic, tranquil environment. And that effect on the autonomic nervous system and the sympathetic load, I think, has the ability for the body to release because that's very important concept that I don't think a lot of people pay attention to. If you're in this fight or flight state all the time, you're holding on to things. Your tissues are tough, right? Your tissues are just ready for, you know, some sort of, you know, response to a threat. And it doesn't allow us to rest, digest and eliminate versus, you know, and when we get locked into that Paris that that sympathetic dominant state, our body holds on to things. And I think, you know, part of the therapeutic benefits of these baths is shifting the autonomic nervous system towards a state of higher coherence, you know, with the heart rate variability and vagal nerve output and everything else. It's just such a beautiful thing and is essential for releasing in the healing process. Yeah. I would imagine if you are tensed up and your muscles are tight, then your lymphatic system probably isn't working. Probably so correct. Yeah. Relaxation of the muscles with like foam rolling or massage probably is an important part as well. Oh, yeah. I love my massages. Yeah. Yeah. Maybe we can now move on with, or actually, I wanna also mention, so, you know, taking clay in the morning or activated charcoal or something, these binders, do they actually work and, when's the best time to take them? So, you know, I know that there are these charts out there that say, hey, if you have this mycotoxin, you know, in the urine analysis to match it with, you know, charcoal, zeolite clay or whatever. You know, I I just questioned the research and evidence around that and its actual clinical utility. I'm not saying it doesn't have, you know, other binding properties to go in there and have the affinity towards heavy metals or some of these other kinds of, compounds. But, you know, I just don't know if it's it's, gonna have the same therapeutic benefit as a binder as it relates to, mold toxicity and chronic inflammatory response syndrome. So I know that's heavily debated amongst that community when dealing with mold and its ability to inflict an immune system. And we could unpack that a little bit further if you want. But, I do think, look, it will have detox promoting benefits for very specific, indications. Yeah. So I do think, you know, it does have benefit. Generally speaking, I love chlorella, you know, charcoal is it's a it's a charcoal activated charcoal is what is used in the hospital if you overdose on Tylenol. Right? So if you overdose on Tylenol, then you're gonna come in and they're gonna mix this black soup. Right? They don't even give you the capsules. It's gross. And you gotta drink that crap down for, you know, Tylenol toxicity because it has the ability to go in there and it prevents, you know, some of the intermediate metabolites of Tylenol, NaPQI specifically, NAPQI, for Tylenol, hepatotoxicity. So it goes in there and mitigates the stress on that system. So yes, charcoal works, chlorella, you know, binds to heavy metals, you know, cilantro extract, some research on heavy metals, metals, clay, more absorbent and nonspecific and pulls things out, generally speaking. Right. So there are different, you know, agents that are out there that are used commercially for different clinical applications. Gotcha. And you don't want to take them with food or like other supplements or something like that. You just want to take them away from the body. You got it. Yeah. Take it away. Right. So I, you know, when it comes down to binders, I mean, I say one hour before three hours after any drug or medication or supplement, right? Because it's going to go in there and interfere and absorb these things work like molecular sponges and they just wait and they hang out and they absorb and eliminate things and prevent it's, it's, absorption in your system. Gotcha. What about after a sauna? Is that a good time to take it or before? You know, that's a great question. I don't think there's any real research that I've seen on binders in relation to saunas, But I would, you know, personally do it maybe before. So because you gotta think about the transient time of digestion in relation to, you know, the sweating and then the rehydration post sauna therapy. You wanna make sure we're assimilating and absorbing the minerals, you know, after sauna. Again, I usually like to do coconut water after my sauna therapies. Right? Great source of magnesium and other trace minerals. And, I usually do my sauna at nighttime right before I shower and go to bed. But, yeah. So, binders, I typically recommend depending on the clinical situation, two to three times a day, usually morning, lunch and evening, right. Or morning and evening, as it relates to I would probably take it before going into the sauna. Again, the transient time that's needed for it to make its way into the small intestine as it relates to, you know, your exercise and recovery, because, you know, if you're doing a true kind of rebounding and detox, if you're jumping rope and jumping on the trampoline, then jumping in the sauna to help with the bio trans relation and elimination, I think that's, that's kind of a nice little targeted approach. Gotcha. Are there any other, like, supplements that, could be taken on a daily basis? Some NAC or glutathione, melatonin? Yeah. There there's all of those are very important to help support, you know, bio transformation, detox and elimination. I really think that, again, I I look at things in the context of n of one medicine. So, you know, like, there's there's all sorts of things that help support detox, like you alluded to, you know, NAC, even, even B vitamins. Right? So again, going back to cytochrome p450s and looking at phase one detoxification there, you know, all the B vitamins are really needed to support that, you know, milk thistle, what's the role of milk thistle? What's a role of dandelion, you know, extract as a cholagogue? And cholagogues basically help squeeze the gallbladder, you know, through CCK activation and cholecystokinin and basically allows your body to mobilize that bile acid from the gallbladder into, you know, the digestive system. And then the theory is once you squeeze the gallbladder, you go in there and you have that sponge. Right. Whatever binder it might be. I prefer, you know, well call cholestyramine in a targeted, you know, mold situation to go in there and absorb that bile to prevent its enteropatic recirculation. So there are numerous different forms of compounds, you know, vitamin E, zinc, you know, different amino acids, all of those things play a very important role. But yes, you alluded to, you know, the role of n acetylcysteine, which is very important non glutathione precursor. And as we know, glutathione is your body's master antioxidant. You know, there's, IP6, from RiceBran that's been shown to also help with, biotransformation. You know, there's the role of artichoke as well, you know, very important. Burdock root, chicory, berberine, all those things help stimulate kind of the phase one detox, you know, phase of, elimination. So there's there's multiple different things. And, you know, for my patients that I see here clinically, I typically run a very specific testing to identify those micro micronutrient deficits. Right. So from a therapeutic, perspective, it's, you know, in my practice, I run what's called the multi omic analysis. So I get DNA on everybody. I get proteomics, metabolomics, exposomics, microbiomics, right? It's, it's, it's a lot of information, but, you know, these different molecular layers tell us a story and tell us where our deficits and excesses are, where our threats are and what we need to focus on. If the gut is all, not good, right? If like there's leaky gut and there's increased on your inactivity and there's signs of leaky gut and I look at your blood under my microscope and, you know, there's, you know, signs of endotoxemia. We gotta focus on the gut first, right? Because leaky gut, leaky brain. And the next thing you know, you're gonna mobilize, you know, some of these toxins into your, your central nervous system. If the, you know, the intestines aren't appropriately healed. So there's a very specific therapeutic order and just going in there and saying, Hey, I'm gonna start detoxing. No, you know, you can't manage what you don't measure and test don't guess, you know, get those kind of that baseline, understand what the hell we're dealing with first mitigate exposure, go go home and detox your house and your environment and everything else. Try to support the system naturally with the lifestyle things that we've done. And then, you know, if the gut is okay, all right, then we can move into a targeted detox phase. Right. And, you know, the big thing that you would want to keep in mind is, yeah, you're going to want some things that are going to help with, bio transformation and detox formulas. You're going to want to have some natural chelators and binders a part of it. You want to provide the micronutrients needed for phase one and phase two, you know, whether it's amino acids, b vitamins and so forth. And also you wanna make sure that you have the appropriate antioxidant signaling there so that, you know, as we, force the elimination that your body's not gonna basically, oxidize or get taxed based on that additional stress. And that's gonna be your your glutathione, your vitamins, a, c, e, selenium, and zinc, and vitamin c. Right. You know, very important at boosting that as well. Things that boost NRF2 signaling, which are, is our natural endogenous antioxidant pathway signaling on a genetic level, NRF2. Right. You know, things like broccoli sprout extract and resveratrol, you know, all very important kind of components in a targeted detox, increasing your fiber, right? All that stuff's very important. So as you move through a detox plan, right, you know, I think it's very important to identify what, what we're going to address, how we're going to address it, Test don't guess. Right. And there's other therapies out there too. You know, I think, you know, the role of therapeutic plasma exchange, you know, which is basically pull the blood out, filter it and, you know, pull out all the plasma, exchange it with albumin, put it back in pulling out all that stuff. Not, you know, all the toxins in circulation has some therapeutic benefits. There's research that was recently published through the Buck Institute that looked at, you know, the role of therapeutic plasma exchange and reversing clock gene and biological aging activity. Right. There's also, you know, some very interesting research around EBU extracorporeal blood ozonation oxygenation. This technique we use in our office to, pull the blood out, filter it, ozonate it, illuminate it and put it back in. Right. And basically that helps, you know, based you do an oil change. Not only are you doing an oil change of the blood, right. And pulling out all the bad stuff. You're also, enhancing the ozonides in the system. And those ozonides actually work on those NRF2 signaling pathways works on AMP kinase. Right? So it's gonna help with metabolic priming and sensitivity and, has multiple therapeutic benefits. So a part of any longevity stack, I think, is looking at, you know, the appropriate cadence of some of these different therapies, whether it's TPE or EBU, right. In regards to supporting some of these bioelimination, pathways and supporting NRF2 signaling. Does that make sense? Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. You know, there's a ways to actually just filter the blood and to take out, various, you know, microplastics, heavy metals, and even, autoimmune, related proteins and things like that. But, yeah, they tend to be more costly and, you know, there's a certain barrier for them, but they. There's evidence that you work and they, they are being used, quite a lot. But you mentioned one thing very interesting that you need to fix your gut because otherwise you're just reabsorbing those toxins that you detox. So maybe we can walk through of the importance of, having some sort of a prioritization. So first, you know, yeah, you test and, figure out what is the issue, but let's say, I would imagine most people who might struggle with symptoms related to toxin accumulation, they tend to also have some intestinal permeability because, you know, for for to reach toxin accumulation that reaches some, you know, actual symptoms, you need to have some sort where where does it come from in the first place? And the intestinal permeability is one of the most common, you know, routes into the blood for, the outside world to get into our blood. So, is there any specific things people need to do to fix the gut? And, you know, once they are already stimulating all these detox pathways, right, with, these various, lifestyle interventions and supplements, etcetera, is there other ways to promote them, or prevent them from being reabsorbed as well? So, like, first, how can they fix the gut? Any specific things there and secondly, to prevent them from being reabsorbed to actually make them excrete. Yeah, that's a great question. I think, you know, Hippocrates said all disease begins in the gut. Right. And I think that has to refer to multiple different things as it relates to our immune system, because 70% of our immune system resides in the gut in the form of GALT, gut associated lymphoid tissue. I also believe that our barrier systems, it's one of our key barrier systems throughout our body. So we have different barriers, you know, in our barrier systems, most importantly, are, you know, in our digestive system, our bronchial system, arguably that's like 90% of our barrier system that we need to pay attention to. So what we're breathing in and what we're eating is going to have a tremendous impact on, you know, the permeability, due to that chronic inflammation. So preceding this issue with the gut has to deal with chronic inflammation leading to damage and that damage increases the permeability of that tissue allowing for transcellular or paracellular migration of things that were selectively permeable for. Now that that selective permeability is no longer there. The, you know, the filter is no longer there. That safety net's no longer there. And we have larger macromolecules absorbing and getting into the system. So when it comes down to gut health first, and that's why I do a staggered multi omic approach with my patients is know the genetic predispositions, know what's going on within, you know, the proteomic signatures, look at the metabolomics, what's going on on a metabolomic level, what's going on on a microbiomic level, because arguably some of the microbiome testing I do looks at also some of the gut physiology, right? And then what's going on at an environmental toxin level, those five core omics signals for me clinically is the a huge snapshot. Now, do I do transcriptomic testing, you know, looking at RNA and so forth? Yes. I do epigenetic testing. All those are kind of luxury items, you know, depending on the clinical presentation. But when you look at the gut and the microbiome and you start seeing that there's dysbiosis, imbalance of gut bacteria, there's exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, EPI. We're not digesting and emulsifying our food properly. There's, histamine issues with EPX protein. There is fecal calprotectant due to transmigration of leukocytes or white blood cells into the gut wall. And we start seeing these different patterns. There's very zonulin leaky gut, right? There's a very specific targeted approach that we need to address those issues with depending on what the person is showing and demonstrating. So for me, I like to look at all those key pieces of information and determine, you know, do we have to focus on the gut first? Right? The answer is not always yes. Right? Some people have fantastic digestive systems, but they're just eating shitty food all the time. And there might be, you know, organophosphates or they like to golf. They live near a golf course within three miles of a golf course and the, glyphosate is aerosolized and they're huffing it down and it's bioaccumulating in their system. Right. Or, you know, it is the phthalates and parabens or the micro plaque, whatever the heck it is. Right. So it just depends on the data points. Right. So when it comes down to the digestive health, for me, for test, don't guess, see what's going on. If we have to focus on gut first, I lead with gut first. And then, you know, if there's malabsorption patterns, and you're trying to give them oral supplementation, shits not going to be absorbed. Pun intended, right? You know, the supplements aren't going to be used and there's gonna be malabsorption and your body's not gonna use and you're just gonna be having expensive, expensive feces, right? And expensive urine because your body's assimilation of these micronutrients are not going to be there. So, in that case, I would personally work on the gut, the dysbiosis, the malabsorption and all those factors first, whatever it is through targeted specific nutraceutical supplementation or drug medications. And, you know, somebody needs Creon, we got them Creon, you know, which is, you know, pharmaceutical grade digestive enzymes. If we, you know, need to do a low histamine, low oxalate, low whatever diet, we figure out the dietary components match with your genetics. Then if we need to, you know, heal the gut, you know, there's so many different leaky gut protocols out there, whether it's in carnosine, glutamine, BPC one hundred and fifty seven, you know, bone broth, whatever the hell it is, you know, to go in there and try to help promote the healing of the gut. But you still have to mitigate those stressors or those inflammagens that led to the degradation to begin with. So it's about identifying those threats to, cellular integrity. And then, you know, if there's malabsorption issues and they're profound like the patient I had right before before you, before jumping on this podcast. Fantastic guy. You know, did a lot of, the bulk of the testing and, you know, malabsorption through the roof and, you know, really high, eight Oh, hdg and lipid peroxides indicating cytotoxicity and DNA and genotoxicity, DNA damage. So the therapeutic order around that is like, okay, we're going to do some IVs and then we're going to do nutraceuticals to clean up the gut. So we're going to replete the profound level of micronutrient deficiencies from years of malabsorption, dysbiosis, and all sorts of stuff. And again, I got these tests for him covered by Medicare, you know, covered by insurance here in The US. Some of them, most of them. Right. And that's, that's a very fun dance to do. But so now we developed a therapeutic protocol. That's going to be replenishing the micronutrients intravenously to give the body the cofactors that needs to heal. We're going to remove those ongoing exposures. We're going to pull out the toxins through what I have next door with all the different tools and technologies from lymphatic mobilization and so forth. Get them ready for EBU. Right. Ultimately. And, you know, do the lymphatic and ozone sauna and so forth to just, you know, move things, did not have increased gut permeability. So there's no like, you know, healing of the intestines needed. That was, that was intact. Barrier was intact. But just had a really high, toxic body burden. So, you know, everything is end of one in my practice, right? I don't like there are protocols or guidelines based on best practices on how to approach and structure a therapeutic intervention, but I adopt it for the person uniquely. I hope that made sense. Yeah. Did that answer your question? It makes sense. Yeah. Yeah. One question I got was, you mentioned the pesticides, with, being near a golf course. There was this recent study Yep. A few weeks ago that, people who are the closest to the golf course had a higher risk of Parkinson's, and they think it's the glyphosate from the drinking water and things like that that they spray on the golf course. So this raises the question of, you know, should you buy organic food or, if you live next to some sort of a big farm that has glyphosate sprayed or some other pesticides, how big of a concern do you think that is and should people buy, you know, a 100% organic and a 100% even, like, you know, let's say grass fed versus grain fed, you know, this factory farmed meat versus some regenerative farmed meat because of the antibiotic use, etcetera. Like, how big of those how how big of a concern those things are to the exposome and, the person's health? That's a fantastic question. And actually that, you know, that was a study that I was referring to as well. I've had patients that don't golf that live within three miles of golf course that have glyphosate through the roof. They eat organic. So, you know, is it in the water? Is it aerosolized as a question and its association with neurodegeneration is a very important component in looking at somebody's, intrinsic capacity or longevity as a whole. So with that being said, you know, whether or not to eat a 100% organic, my take is, you know, there's a dirty dozen and clean 15 by the environmental working group here in The U S that kind of lays out, you know, some of the different produce that have a low residue burden, that you could get away with, you know, things with a thicker shell that you're able to peel away, tend to be less of a exposure compared to something that you eat the skin for. You know, obviously always on the side of precaution, try to go organic wherever you can, but, you know, life is life and you're going to go out to a restaurant and then you're going to have berries that are inorganic. And, you know, do you wash the berries in your, your drinking water before you eat? I don't know. I've, I've been in so many interesting circles where people are doing some fascinating things that it's just like, all right, you know, just shy of bringing your own food to a dinner. Well, people do that to bring their own food to a dinner, thing. And that's, that's a little whatever. But again, it's not about fear. It's about resiliency. You know, you want to be able to go through life and have the ability to run through things, detox, eliminate and not have it slow you down. What's that allostatic burden? How do we cultivate resiliency? Is there a low level of hormetic benefit to that level of stress? Generally speaking, I think there is some level of hormesis that could be there, but you know, when it comes down to toxins, you know, you gotta pick and choose your poison. You know, alcohol is completely different than like organophosphates, right? And arguably both toxic, right? We know that, you know, alcohol is associated with all sorts of bad things, but, you know, in moderation arguably might have some benefit. And I think a lot of that has to do with the socialization of it and the be able to the ability to de, you know, decompress and be with, friends and in a positive environment and share, you know, fun stories and laugh. Some of the best conversations and laughter I've ever had was around, you know, at a bar with friends and colleagues. Right. And those are very helpful. So, you know, when it comes down to, you know, a 100% organic, again, you could use 30 dozen clean 15 as a kind of a guiding light when it comes down to factory versus regenerative farming practices, obviously always go regenerative. You know, I have grass finished, grass, grass fed, grass finished, you know, here in The US is going to be one of our, our target goals, you know, because not just because it's grass fed means that it's been finished that way. So from my understanding, fed and finished is, you know, very important. And then, yeah. You know, filtered water, you know, what does the water look like? You know, and, I, I try sparingly not to drink tap water from restaurants. At my home, we have like a double reverse osmosis system with remineralization, alkalization, and a couple of other features to the water. I've been gifted a bunch of these weird things where you spin the water with the stuff and I don't know, it creates the structure and all that crap. I don't know if it works, but it tastes different, you know, pre and post. So, you know, I do some of that action. But you know, if you're at a restaurant, you know, try try to, you know, be cautious with, you know, the ice cubes, if you were to look under the, you know, most icemaker machines, if you've ever been in somebody's backyard, you know, restaurant and looked at the icemaker, mold everywhere. Yeah. Right? Yeah. Right? That's so that's a hidden exposure. So ice cubes, unfiltered water in the restaurants, you know, unfiltered water at home, like I have some friends that are like, Oh, we're just gonna drink drink tap. And I'm like, you know, maybe that's a little bit of a hormetic stress. But generally speaking, you would want to get some nice, you know, if we're, you know, 80% water, you want some good quality water, man, spend the money, whatever, get the system, your home dialed in, put in the filters, you know, and, and everything to get that dialed in to mitigate that exposure. Why not? You know, it's one time investment. It's gonna last you a lifetime. Yeah. It matters what you're most exposed to and what you're consuming the most. So if let's say someone eats meat once a week, right? Then it probably is less of a concern if, if it's a grass fed and grass finished versus, you know, factory farmed meat because they only did once a week. But you you drink water every day and several liters ideally. You cook your food in it. You, you know, wash yourself as well in it. If the water is dirty, then, that exposure accumulates a lot because you're exposed to it the most. And the same with, like, you know, what you eat the most. You know, someone might eat a lot of, you know, let's say, olive oil or fish or something, but, if that fish is is high in heavy metals and you're eating it every day, then it's going to accumulate it. Whereas versus if you eat fish once a week, then, it's not going to be a big deal, that much. Correct. And, you know, back to the water and like showering and bathing and soaking in the water, you know, very important concept is, the, you know, with water as a shower, as you showers, the concept of free radical halogenation, right? And that refers to going back to the periodic table of elements and looking down the column of, you know, the halogens And we got chlorine, fluorine, and bromine all having, you know, higher electronegativity versus ionide. So, you know, and this relates to thyroid function. So if we're being exposed not only through vaporized water in the shower that has chlorine, fluorine, and bromine, and we have thyroid issues and our iodine is not being absorbed because it's being displaced by these stronger bulkier, you know, cations or I'm sorry, anions that are displacing, you know, the iodine, in our system. That's a big thing, you know? And if you go and start measuring some of that, you'll see like low iodine in like a twenty four hour urine collection. You might see compromised zinc and selenium, and then you run, you know, some sort of, toxic tests and you're gonna see, you know, different, fluoride compounds and derivatives that are high bromide derivatives that are high as well. Right. So free radical halogenation is a part of like, kind of that, regular daily exposure, you know, unknowingly to, to our system. Yeah. Maybe we can go through some, more of these advanced cases as well. We're not gonna go through the exact, you know, protocol of how to do it, but let's say, you know, mold illness. What are some steps for, you know, not all steps, but let's say, is there anything specific, any special drugs or pharmaceuticals that are used for that? Any special, therapeutics like EEBO or something like that, and any special tests that people should look out for? Oh, Sam, Sam, Sam, Sam. This is a very loaded question. So I will share with you what I historically would do for mold related illness. Now I worked very closely. I'll, I'll start the conversation off with the caveat that I worked very closely with doctor Haman, Andrew Haman for many years in his practice in Virginia, through George Washington University. And that was very tied into the research endeavors with, you know, doctor Shoemaker and the Shoemaker protocol. And I know that there's, you know, Campbell and Shoemaker and Neil Nathan and all these different arguments about who is right when it comes down to mold. And how do you assess it? How do you treat it? How do you mitigate it and everything else? So after exiting, managing a lot of chronic inflammatory response syndrome, SIRS, I will start the narrative off that, you know, with your story and your story is very unique between Sim and Inka. You were living in mold for twenty years. No issues. Inka comes in, moves in, you know, happy to be with the great Simlat. And all of a sudden she's getting sick living with you. And it's not you, my friend. It's the mold. Right? She was manifesting symptoms, right? That caused her to her immune system to wear down. Right? So the issue with this is twenty five percent of the patient population carries a very specific genetic haplotype with their HLA genes that predisposes them to awards immunological hypersensitivity to environmental exposures. Okay. So again, twenty five percent of the population is genetically predisposed to being sensitive to these different biotoxin threats in our environment. Now when faced with that environmental threat, a part of your immune system turns on, right, and doesn't have the ability to turn off. Right? And we could see that on a transcriptomic level. And essentially you have then whether it was years ago in college or, you know, the other day or chronic exposure in your office, whatever the hell it is. Right. You have that insult to injury in the genetically predisposed that creates this chronic inflammatory response. And this is a multi system multi system multi symptom clinical manifestation of this, inflammatory immune mediated process. And again, what I have seen is very interesting because we did the transcriptomic testing, we did the data, we found all these different threats of biotoxins to the genetically predisposed. And, you know, there's a very specific algorithm that I historically followed. I no longer manage, you know, chronic mold in my practice. I just, you know, I just don't have the bandwidth anymore with, you know, the Board of Precision Medicine and everything else. There's a lot of handholding, you know, that is required with this. There's a lot of, I would say, coaching and neuropsychiatric support that is needed for this, you know, inflicted population. They need support beyond what I could offer in my private practice. So I'm going to leave with, and long story short, you know, the testing process for me historically was, yes, we would get all your conventional biomarkers associated with that immunological expression of chronic, you know, of biotoxin as it relates to SIRS that includes HLA testing, MMP nine, We would get C4A specifically from National Jewish, in Colorado because that is the reference lab. Because again, you know, if you were to go to LabCorp, they're using a diluting agent in their test that serially dilutes out and, denatures the C4A biomarker. You know, we look at, you know, VEGF and, you know, MMP nine and, you know, what else? Oh, got MSH, melanocytes stimulating hormone. And we would get that biomarker baseline. We would then look at in, our severe cases, because oftentimes we were the last stop on the train for a lot of these folks grappling with SIRS. We've been to, you know, a bunch of different doctors, all sorts of weird diagnosis, all sorts of unique protocols, but they didn't track or trend, you know, the key components of, of, you know, this entire protocol. We also use what's called a visual contrast sensitivity test that has been clinically validated by the DOT to measure neuro inflammation based on chronic inflammation of the brain in the optic region and the optic nerve that compromise your ability to distinguish, contrast differential within your visual kind of acuity there. And, essentially that is demonstrating neuroinflammation. And we use that to trend and track that level of neuroinflammation and systematic improvement with the binder and the binder we would use as cholestyramine and well call, you know, arguably. And the only other thing that has been shown to have the right charges, beets and okra extract to, as a binder to go in there and help specifically bind to biotoxin. Then we would look at the transcriptome, you know, the RNA testing. So again, you know, if your, your DNA is the instruments to your own symphony orchestra, we're going to measure the melody coming off of that instrument. Is it upregulated or downregulated in, you know, vibrational frequency or gene expression and certain things like the mitochondria are always downregulated. And this phenomenon is known as molecular hypometabolism, which is associated with cell danger response. Again, you can look at the research of Doctor. Robert Nafenow, and cell danger response to get a better understanding of what that insult means and the different phases of CDR, and how that relates to the healing process. So once we have that information, the VCS test, the biomarkers and labs, transcriptomic testing, we also want you to test your home. Right? And the company that, is being endorsed now, is LiveBiotech fungi jet fungi ten test. Right? It goes beyond a hurt me too test, or ERMI test. It has more speciations of molds comparatively. And so we would get LiveBiotech Fungi ten for molt. And then there's two other tests that we found due to the prevalence of water damage building, not being just mold, it's polymicrobial in nature, right? Meaning you're going to have bacteria and viruses, bacteria, you have bacteriophages and then it's all sorts of different things. So that's when we recommend also when you test your home to also test with, Envirobiomics for actinomyocetes and endotoxin. Right now, it's very interesting what we found with the bulk of these folks that are dealing with water damage building, SIRS, chronic inflammatory response syndrome. I think over fifty two percent of individuals were suffering from the exposure to something called a species of bacteria called Actinomyocetes, right? Actinomyocetes is very unique. It's a bacteria that looks and behaves like a molt. To me, it's like the life bridge between a eukaryote and a prokaryote. A molt and a bacteria, right? It's a gram positive faculty of anaerobic filamentous spore forming bacteria. What the hell does that mean? It's a bacteria that behaves like a molt. Okay? Mhmm. What we found is most people are colonized with it on our skin, just like we're colonized. You know, if you've ever worked in a hospital, you're probably colonized with MRSA. Right? But the thing with this, actinomyocetes, it releases this neuroinflammatory toxin. And this toxin activates complement c four a. And C4a complement activation leads to the activation of MEK membrane attack complex. A membrane attack complex, as the name implies, pokes hole in your membranes, causes the membrane to be leaky, not good. And then that signals apoptosis. And that apoptosis could be taking place in your brain, your lung. It could be affecting your ability to climb up a flight of stairs and upregulates HIF 1a H1F, hypoxia inducible factor 1a. We would see that on transcriptomic testing. It, signals MAP kinases and those MAP kinases are involved with, you know, the secondary signal transduction towards the whole Mac, membrane attack complex ultimately. And, so what we found is that most of these people are colonized with this bacteria that have dwelled in a water damaged building. And it's not necessarily the mold. Mold was like less than 15, you know, percent of mold related or SIRS, you know, in that water damage building scenario. You know, mold was very low in the prevalence of the research from Shoemaker. And again, I stick with the Shoemaker protocol because the most evidence based research published system as an MD, I gotta go with the research. I'm not gonna go with like bullshit, low grade, you know, expert opinion. You know, there's a lot of opinions out there and you know what they say about opinions. They're like, right? They're like assholes. Everybody's got one in the l stinks. So we need to make sure we stick grounded with the research and evidence to support what we're doing. And I'm not saying, you know, there's no validity to the other testing of other folks. I'm just saying, hey, this is kind of what I've been trained and trained in. I do think there's some utility of other forms of testing and other, you know, binders and other protocols. You know, you ask the question, does EBU fit into this role? And I do think EBU fits into this role. I do think Sauna fits into this role. I do think alternative binders have a potential role in all of this. And it's not always just mold. It's like accumulation, as we discussed in this entire podcast of different environmental toxins that is not just, you know, from a water damaged building, but it could be mycotoxins from your food. It could be the heavy metals and organophosphates, everything that we've we've discussed and unpacked. So we went over the testing, right, of the home, the blood, the transcriptome. We went over kind of the protocol with a VCS test and doing a binder, and that's going to be kind of the gauge. And then ultimately, there's a whole therapeutic protocol where you start looking at, you know, different, food sensitivity testing and, you know, correcting gliadin antibodies, hormone optimization, you know, looking at other kind of biomarkers, you know, within this protocol. And then ultimately, you know, you start correcting, you know, like if TGF betas runs really high, there's really solid evidence about Losartan, you know, ACE, inhibitor, combat angiotensin receptor blocker, Losartan and its ability to drop TGF beta one. You're a transgormone growth factor beta one. Right. And once you start correcting those biomarkers, you ultimately get onto intranasal VIP, that's the Shoemaker protocol. And the intranasal VIP is reportedly used to undo the nuclear atrophy in the brain and restore brain tissue neurogenesis now with the ever evolving landscape. And this is where, you know, it's, I think there's so many different components that we could be looking into, like plasmalogens. Right? I don't know if you're familiar with plasmalogens, but I've I've found a lot of folks that have this neuroinflammatory process due to these environmental biotoxic factors have low plasmalogens, and they also have really high, spheromide, ceramide to sphingomyelin ratios. When we start seeing ceramides accumulating in your system and the sphingomyelin is going down, that's not good. Right? That's excessive neuronal cellular tone or right brain on fire again. So there's all these different components. And I think the transcriptomic testing, the plasmallergen testing, these are all iterations on the traditional shoemaker protocol. Instead of just looking at gliadin antibodies, do food sensitivity and and allergy testing. Instead of just looking at correcting the androgens, look at the hormonal balance as a whole. Right. And then, you know, do you need VIP at the end, basal intestinal peptide, which is an intranasal peptide used to help restore the brain? I've seen some fantastic results from that, you know, but I've also seen people where it you know, we got them 90% better with without the VIP, they'd get went on the VIP and the benefit was marginal because they had the greatest therapeutic benefit, you know, in that whole corrective therapeutic order, you know, clearing the mark ons. A big part of that is also clearing mark ons. Mark ons are, multi antibiotic resistant coag negative staph aureus. That's it's Mercer's bastard cousin. Right? And people are colonized with Marcons in their sinuses and Marcons releases this polytoxin. And this polytoxin actually works as a neuroinflammatory issue as well. So when it comes down to mold illness, right, and SIRS and binders and home testing and everything else, it's very n of one with looking at the genetics, the transcriptomics, the Envirobiomics, the neuroinflammatory burden, and looking at all those other confounding variables that are influencing their their path of phenotype or their clinical presentation towards that disease. I don't know if I answered your question appropriately and I'm sorry, went on my tangent there with that. I'm just like, I've got a little bit of PTSD as it relates to that because it was, you know, dealing with mold illness is not easy from a clinical standpoint. And that's kind of why I stepped back from managing it, you know, in my private practice. Yeah, No. Yeah. It's very surprising, how common it is. You know, a lot of our buildings, have some water damage, especially older ones. And, you know, the that inevitably leads to mould as well. Yeah. But maybe we can also cover a little bit about heavy metals. Is there any, you know, differences in the protocol with, heavy metal exposure? Oh, yeah. Absolutely. You know, once you get to a certain point in time within the protocol, usually after Marcon's testing and correcting the gut and balancing or trying to balance the hormones, we're on the hormone, hormone metal time testing. Right. So as you're because there's no point, according to the therapeutic order, to start hormones early, plus or minus the benefit on that. And again, I think, you will get to a point where you have to do the heavy metal testing and, you know, there might be a need for a chelation protocol intravenous or oral, right? And, you know, as you're getting to the gut and that's why you do the gut phase before the hormone metal phase, You want to work on the gut phase first, whether food sensitivity, allergies, leaky gut syndrome, dysbiosis, leaky gut syndrome, right. To heal that process. So you can move towards correcting the hormones and doing an appropriate detox. Does that make sense? Yeah. And so heavy metals is part of that equation. Again, everybody's, buckets a little bit different. Their exposome is different. So, you know, addressing it once they're at a more stable standpoint, because you don't want to go and mobilize heavy metals in somebody that's neuro neurologically inflamed, right? That's just gonna stir the pot and make things worse. And, you know, especially when they have extreme environmental hypersensitivity is where light sound smell are all triggering events for migraines and headaches and so all sorts of stuff. And you could see that actually on a transcriptomic level. So individuals that had a very unique, signaling pathway on the of the Genie test had something called upregulation, this of ECHOROS, which which are, some of these signaling molecules. And when there was a specific pattern of the ECHOROS, signaling, it basically, there was a, these were my patients that unfortunately suffered from extreme hypersensitivity, light, sound, and smell, you know, even wind blowing, you know, they would just couldn't take it. So, you know, in those cases, you know, we actually would start VIP off low dose before we had actually started off earlier in the protocol, Right. Low dose VIP intranasal to acutely stabilize things right before moving up to VIP is really expensive. It's like, you know, $600 a month, you know, just for a peptide. So, you know, again, that's why you wanna clear the mark ons because mark ons kind of deaminates and breaks down the the VIP and all that other stuff. So there's a very specific therapeutic order and protocol associated with this. Gotcha. But, with the heavy metals, is it more specifically focused on the liver detox pathways or should you focus more on like sweating or something like that? Great question. I think, it's gonna be a combination of both depending on it. And arguably, you know, whether to do EDTA with calcium versus sodium for mercury versus lead, you know, there's some very specific nuances. So it depends on the chelation protocol, but yes, supporting liver, kidney and sauna elimination, all secondary to identifying which metal and which intervention you're going to move forward with. Right? Because, you know, can we do it naturally with cilantro? Is it is first of all, is it provoked versus unprovoked testing? You know, there's some folks, that only do provoked heavy metal testing based on some historical data and research. And this is where you take a little low dose, DMSO before, a heavy metal test to mobilize the heavy metals out of your system so it could be collected in the morning urine. And that helps push it out of the tissue, get into urine. They might also recommend a little bit of glutathione as well on top of the DMSO to do that testing, to get that baseline of what heavy metals are there. And then depending on the heavy metal, you do a targeted chelation kind of protocol. But before you do that, correct the gut, remember, and then, you, support it with the appropriate chelation and then you could do all the phase one, phase two stuff on top of that as well. Gotcha. I've also heard that, blood testing for heavy metals might not be that accurate that you need to do a hair mineral analysis. Is that true or? I'm not, I don't subscribe to the hair mineral analysis testing. I know that's highly debated amongst the functional medicine community. I think there's, some studies that have, a question is clinical validity and utility. So I, I personally don't subscribe to the hair mineral analysis. Not because I'm bald. Right. Before you start, you know, think, oh, you bald guy. That's why you don't like the hair analysis. No, it's I just don't think it has the same, you know, clinical utility comparatively. Gotcha. And maybe last thing we can cover briefly is, microplastics. So these are very foreign, very, new toxins, not toxins per se, but I guess the compounds we're exposed to, and there's not that much clear evidence of, you know, how do you excrete them if you can excrete them, etcetera. So, what is your approach, to that, to, lower the burden of microplastics and nano plastics? Yeah, that's a great question, you know, because they're everywhere from, you know, they line the wrapper of any consumer stabilized product on shelf, you know, they line the inside of cans, aluminum cans. They're on receipt paper and so on and so forth. So there's a tremendous exposure to these microplastics. And it first starts with mitigate, mitigating exposure, you know, identifying those threads and pulling it out. Cutting boards, plastic cutting boards release so much microplastics into the system. Right? So number one, identify and mitigate, remove that ongoing exposure. Number two, you know, are there any targeted detox paths or, protocols for microplastics specifically? I I have not seen any strong well, first of all, what test is valid, you know? Mhmm. And that's that's argued, you know, that's that's heavily argued. And for me, you know, as, had a very interesting conversation with a couple of researchers regarding the clinical utility of testing microplastics, its validity and its actionability. And for me, I'm like, Hey, you guys, you PhDs, go to the lab, figure out the best test, then let me know, I'll order it. Because still right now, getting a signal, some sort of signal is better than nothing. Right? Whether it's measuring all the different bisphenol, metabolites and so forth. Or if we're looking at surrogate markers metabolomically of microplastics, that's another way of doing it. There's this unique biomarker associated with that. And then once you get that information, it's cleanup. It's a biological audit of your environmental exposures to mitigate that ongoing stuff. Right. And then in my experience, I like EBU, right? I'm about to get a machine in the office here from Germany called in endospheresis, which is the new modern version of TPE. And endospheresis is basically, you know, therapeutic plasma exchange without the exchange. It's a, it's a giant filtration, that has very similar, if not identical benefits as TPE without the albumin correction. So, I'm gonna be getting that versus TPE in my office for, for that, process because the albumin correction, it could be a little bit cumbersome for certain patients and that have certain sensitivities. So, I think those blood filtration methods are going to probably be one of the better ways of pulling out some of these microplastics in circulation. But, you know, I'm sure you've seen these microplastics are now being linked to atheroma plaques in the arteries. Right. So they're finding it everywhere in our tissues. They're just depositing, you know, in areas of vulnerability. So, you know, it's, it's just, that's not good. If it's in our micro vascular system and it's leading to micro angiopathic lesions and creating that, atheroma and that, that, that process of, you know, vessel damage. So I think, you know, again, it's a, we can't manage what we don't measure and we should get a baseline, figure it out and then develop a targeted protocol. Because do you start off with some oral supplementation phase one, phase two? Do you do some IV stuff? Do you do some mechanical stuff like flopresso and, Ozone sauna and, you know, even, you know, I was speaking with some fantastic researchers from, Germany. And I'm getting in my office here any day now, Celgene, which is intermittent hypoxic therapy. I don't know if you've seen that, but IHT there's thousands of studies on this. And at the core of what this does, it actually works by, stimulating mitophagy. It's going to pull out all the bad mitochondria, right? So as you're pulling out and this should be a part of a detox protocol, you know, going in there with the intermittent hypoxic therapy and getting and, you know, stimulating mitophagy, getting all the bad stuff out, even before you hit somebody with photobiomodulation, right? From a biohacking perspective, you wait on PBM till after you've recycled and pulled out the bad mitochondria, you've mobilized a lymph and you've done the ozone sauna and you got all that stuff gone. And then you could look into TPE or EBOO or those other kinds of more advanced applications and protocols. I have patients that come in strictly for EBOO on a quarterly cadence for longevity. Right. Because again, it's almost like an oil change for them. They just feel better. I feel better after I do it. So, Yeah. Yeah. I hope I answered your question. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, there's a lot of unknowns and, I guess it comes down to, having the main detox pathways working regularly and then if needed, doing some more disfiltration techniques. And I think the with the future of the human exposome, TPE and endospheresis are gonna be the greatest clinical therapeutic interventions to address this. That's evidence based, evidence driven, You could pre post test it and identify a shift in the biochemistry, not just metabolically, but also exposome, you know, pre and post. So, you know, with the advancements of the human exposome project, I definitely think we're going to be seeing, you know, those those, therapies being our go to right now to go in there and correct some of these, these, burdens in our system. Yeah. Yeah. So, we can start wrapping up as well. We went really, really deep and detailed with this. And, this is only like one chapter of your book that's coming out, the longevity solution. And, Yeah. I just wanted to do a specific, episode on this specific chapter. And, as I understand, your book is coming out quite soon or it's like pretty, pretty, pretty like, in a few weeks. Yeah. I've been saying it for years, but I'm finally got the book to a healthy place. And we're pushing it to publication here in the next few weeks, and we're gonna be doing a, a marketing campaign. We'd love to tap your audience. It's called the longevity equation. And, you know, it's, just based on, you know, my crazy thought process in regards to years of, accumulating this knowledge from some of the greatest teachers that I've had from around the world. I've made a lot of reference to European biological medicine and Austria and Germany, Switzerland, and so forth, you know, not, and I've also studied with some amazing folks here in The US, you know, since I'm a teenager from Michael Murray, Andrew Weil, Peter D'Adamo, all the Institute for functional medicine folks, a four ms folks and so forth. So this has been, you know, a passion of mine for since I was a teenager and I tried my best to put it all into a comprehensive manuscript that kind of outlines the need for precision medicine testing with multi omics. And then what do you do with that data? How do you optimize your environment? How do you mitigate this stress to ultimately enhance your intrinsic capacity, AKA longevity? And the intrinsic capacity, I think, is very important, to assess because I put it in the context of biological four zero one ks. We all have this internal biological health savings account for which we're making daily deposits and withdrawals into. And, there's certain things, that kind of subtract from our savings and there's certain things that we can make deposits in. And I think we covered a lot of those factors here today, you know, with, therapies and mitigation and so forth, gut health. And, you know, how do we basically make these meaningful deposits so that we could actually, you know, cultivate our ROI and our ROI return on investment is going to be health span over a lifespan. And health span is essentially that intrinsic capacity. So, You know, I lay all that out in the book. It's coming out soon. Hopefully we could, you know, get it to your audience when, when it goes to publication here soon. You you have a specific date because of No, not yet. Okay. But I I I it's right there. It's right there. You're, like, August August. Right? I'm shooting for August. Yes. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. It depends when people hear it. So Yeah. If it's out, then it's gonna be in the link in the show notes. Oh, thank you. Well, yeah. Well, it's been a great talking with you and, yeah, we're really thorough. I enjoyed it, a lot. So, where can where can people learn more about, you and your work? Oh, thank you, Sam. You know, I have my private practice. I see patients from all over the country and world. I'm licensed in 40 something states. I have people internationally flying into me here with the Institute for Human Optimization. My website is ifho.org. So if you're on the patient side of things, you know, again, I have patients coming in from all over the place. And then if you're a physician and wanting to learn more about precision medicine, I am the founder and president of the American Board of Precision Medicine. And our website is, abopm.org. And, essentially, we've created a training process to provide physicians, MDs and DOs only right now, with the foundational molecular framework to start thinking along the lines of multi omics and medicine, because this is a future of care. This is what I do clinically. I'm not saying it better or anything. It's just different. And I think, you know, it's important to connect those molecular dots. And if you look at the trend in diagnostics and research, everything's going multi omics, right? Getting those different molecular layers plays a very important role at characterizing individuals unique flavor of their disease process, path of phenotype or their longevity. So, that's what I'm focused on is changing the future health of America and the world with, the board of precision medicine. We could get physicians to start thinking along the lines of genome to phenome healthcare. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. We'll put the links in the show notes. And, yeah, it's, it was great to talk with you again. And, yeah, looking forward to the book. Always, Sam. Thank you so much. Thank you. Thank you. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.