Practicing being old helps you become old. That if you just wake up one day and say, why can't I lift this amount of weights? Why can't I go out and run this mile? Why am I not as virile in bed? All of the things that come with aging. It'll probably kill you. The quality of your relationships is not defined by the length of their time. Quality of your life is not defined by the length of it. It's it's what you do with it in the moment you're in it. Chris, welcome back to the show. Long time no see. Yeah. We had our first podcast in 2018, I think, which, is, seven years ago. And, many people might not be aware of you because my channel has grown a lot since that time. So, maybe you can introduce yourself as, you know, many people call you the the most connected man on Earth. Yeah. So my name is Chris Dancy. I got a chance to go back and listen to the show. We'll talk about that in a minute. I am known as the world's most connected person. In 2008, I was turning 40 years old, and I was having a lot of health issues. I was about, oh my gosh. I have a low in kilos. I used to be able to do this really fast, but I was there with 320. And then maybe you can do the kilos while I'm doing the rest of it. Mhmm. I smoked a couple packs of cigarettes a day. I've been on antidepressants at that point for twenty two years, and benzodiazepines. I drank too much. I used a lot of recreational drugs, a lot of crazy stuff, but I was doing great at work. And I thought to myself, gosh, I'm 40. It's gonna soon be twenty ten. What does the world look like in the future? And then I made this crazy assumption that in the future, there were no screens, no keyboards, and everything just reacted to you. So I started writing little recursive programs that when I touched my computer or I was on my phone, I was doing anything in my life, if I was connected to the Internet, having that right and entry into, a Google Calendar. And from 2008 to 2011, this Google Calendar collected thousands and thousands and thousands of, little data points, like, if I were to go someplace or eat something, because I was logging food at that point, things like that. And it really remarkably changed my life. And by 2012, so four years into it, I had completely changed my my friend group, my my my physicality, my mind. And then I was at a conference. Someone sitting behind me saw my calendar automatically creating entries. And it was a writer from a magazine called Wired, which is a big tech magazine. It's really big in the nineties and February. I think they're still around. I don't know. I'm sure they are. I just don't read a lot of magazines. And that was it. I mean, a story came out, and then a week later, I was on TV, and then a week later, I was on the cover of business week where I was, like, six months later, and then around the world for TED Talks. And then I got a book deal to write a book back in 2016 called Don't Unplugged. Did a couple TV shows, literally toward the world multiple times about talking about my journey. And then I met you in a well, I think I was actually over in The Nordics doing a Yeah. Roadshow in 2018. And then, yeah. And then, of course, the pandemic happened, and I didn't travel as much, but I just kind of took those skills and moved them into other areas to apply toward populations. So that's it kind of in a nutshell. Mhmm. Yeah. It's a lot of good visuals. I give good Google if you just put in most connected. Yeah. Yeah. So your your, I guess, main transformation or not transformation, but your tool was using technology to, essentially hack your time and hack your health with different self quantification, technologies and tools. So, yeah, how did you use technology to lose weight and get healthier? Because, you know, I'd say a lot of people just use technology to counter calories or track their weight or subtract their sleep or something like that, but you took it a bit, beyond that, and you had a lot more, I guess, more detailed approach, with that. Well, yeah. I mean, you know, just just tracking calories, you're you're gonna lose anywhere from 40 to 60% more weight than not tracking calories. That's just that's just there there's studies after studies after studies just writing down what you eat if you need more to track the calories. You know? But for me, it was more of a holistic approach of looking at all the ways this data could feed back into my life. You know? I had a, is it okay if I share something with you? Yeah. Of course. Let me see if I can just bring this up for you. I don't know if it'll work. We'll try it. But, like, if you just take my calendar from that time. Right? So this is, like, 2012 or '13. I can't remember which day this one's from. What I was doing was I was color coding the entry. So it wasn't that, you know, logging my food. Obviously, that would help me be more aware of it in a lot of ways, just seeing the calories and macronutrients, etcetera. But how it related to other behaviors. So, you know, there was always specific people or places I was hanging out when I was more prone to eat poorly. It wasn't just going to a fast food restaurant. So that was allowed me to really take the next step, which was saying, what would it take to create that kind of the conditions around if I wanted to eat earlier or I didn't wanna eat poorly? So simple things like if I really wanted fast food, I had to actually I couldn't run at that point, but I had to walk or run to get it. If I wanted, something not so bad, you know, but still not very healthy, I could take my bike. But if I wanted something absolutely delicious, I could drive to it. And then just, you know, to be honest, I mean, some of the people I hang out with, they only ate certain ways. Right? So you don't see that, you know, because you think you're just hanging out with friends. So for me, it was really about seeing how a life comes together, if that makes sense. But then, like, really dumb things, like, just simple hack routines or and I have a lot of this nowadays. It's just embedded in everything. But, like, if I was on my computer and I was in a conference call long before they were really normal, but they were still web you know, we were doing Skype back then. You know, it wasn't this. And I spoke loud, you know, just a sensor on my desk. I've got still got one to this day. They're just a lot smaller, you know, would dim the lights naturally if I started talking too loud or too fast. So, you know, I think a lot can be said about my story about using technology, but it was really about self awareness. It was taking everything that was in my life and making it a mirror. So it wasn't just a piece of data. It was a piece of data that turned into a behavior. Does that make sense? Mhmm. Yeah. Gotcha. So you were using certain rules in your daily daily life to help with yeah. If I I would geofence the bar. So I went to the bar and I was there past, you know, fifteen minutes. I'd get a text message from myself. At one hour, a text message that got sent to my bartender I knew who were out real well. You know, an hour after that, my my partner would get sent a text message. I mean, saying, go get me. I geofenced the mall. I was I Google Glass long before I had, you know, reg regular I have the meta glasses now, but, and, you know, it would tell me to slow down my spending because I my credit card was connected to my system. And and if I kept spending, it would just I would cut my own credit card off. It was, I mean, it was it was radically different, but I think, again, most people look at one part of their lives, and I saw my life as a a collection of of feedback mechanisms in everything I did, whether it was my car or my home or a Fitbit at that point. You know? Mhmm. With, you know, the greatest information really coming from how I how I spoke, you know, how I behaved and the ability to capture that, you know, we had it because we had small cameras that I wore for a long time that photographed every few seconds. And there were some, wristbands called the capture that would capture what I was saying from time to time, but it was all high friction. I'd have to tap on it to start a a session with it. And, of course, all that's you know, today, you can just you can just wear a pendant, you know, that just captures everything you say all day long. You know? So Right. It's it's so much simpler now to do what I did, but I was early. Yeah. You were kind of living in the future with the with the what what we would now nowadays consider archaic technology or, you know, less advanced technology. And in the future, in the next twenty, thirty, fifty years is gonna be even more obsolete in comparison. So in the future, we will have a lot of, you know, tracking tracking devices to track your heartbeat, track your, energy expenditure, track your, your mood, body temperature, all those things, and then give you direct feedback about your biology. Yeah. In real time. Happen in the future, but you were doing it already with, the available means in 2000. About 2000. I know almost twenty years ago. Mhmm. Yeah. Gotcha. And today today, it's you know, and the other great thing, I mean, obviously, with the rise of, you know, Symantec AI, having all having almost twenty years worth of data about my life that can be queried in real time is a tremendous advantage. Mhmm. You know? It's, I've been able to nowadays do things as provocative as allow my my spouse to talk or query me. How would I answer something? You know? I've I've long maintained that, you know, death of your physical body is just just that. It's your essence and what you left to how you behaved is still around. Right? It's in the people that you grew up with or the way that they changed because they knew you. And I just think, you know, a more disembodied set of ways to speak is something that's completely usable. We call it barebot, so it's it's kinda neat. And I've, you know, and I've cloned my my video cell. So a lot of the times, if I'm asked to do a, like, a commercial for an event I'm going to speak at or something, I'll just have, you know, the AI me say it, and they don't know. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. What are some of the things that, you find most useful nowadays? Let's say, one of the best tools or certain of these routines or cues that make life easier or make your health tracking easier. I don't think there's a whole I mean, the hard part is nowadays, a lot of the tools have become kind of ecosystems onto themselves. Right? You know, so back if you go 2010, 2011, 2012 when, you know, we have really simple tracking tools like a Fitbit or like that capture I was talking about. Their APIs were open, so you could really connect them to other things through Zapier, IFTT, super simply. Nowadays, the ecosystems are a lot more closed than they ever were. So I think it's harder, you know, to get information out of my my phone and into the system I use now. You know, it's a whole thing where it has to run this routine at night and pull it out of the health system and then send it over to my system. It it's not hard. The good news is with things like Vibe coding and, you know, super simple SAS databases like an Airtable or something, you can create these routines, these really robust routines that I used to do with just a little bit of coding experience. And now with, you know, tools like Zite, or it's Fillout is the company, but the their web tool is Zite. It'll create whole back ends for you. So if you say, hey, create a back end that can house this type of data, pull these sources for this data every so often, and then give me a web interface for it. I mean, it's just amazing. Gotcha. Do you have any any, favorite prompts or something like that for, let's say, even some something simple as a JetGPD that people can use? I mean, there's so many. Well, I mean, for me, I mean, you know, I I have a very custom system now that runs I'll I'll pull it up real quick. That runs a large majority of my life, but all of the different, I would, you know, prompts and what have you are just kind of basically embedded in it. Let me see if I can find a copy. There it is. There's one. So it's gonna be I'll make it smaller so it's easier to see. But yeah. So it it it pulls out, you know, what I'm saying throughout the day. A little journal entries, grabs a lot of biometrics. At the end of the day, it'll grab all this, grab spending from my credit card. If I've got places I'm scheduled to go, just go back a few days. This will be easier. It automatically summarizes my feelings, three times a day and gives me a rating. I'll just roll the biometric stuff goes. Like I said, the places. If I interact with specific people that I have a bad experience with, they get tagged there, what I got done. Well, you know, people can make you upset. Yeah. And then, pictures I favorite automatically get, thrown in here. And at the beginning of each day, it kinda gives me an overview based on my entire life on what I should be thinking about that day. Think of it as kind of like a wake up coach. And at the end of the day, it kinda looks at that day and then aligns it to, like, the places I really should be focusing on more. So in this case, this day, I literally didn't get out and get any exercise at all, and I ate way too much. So I like it. It but, you know, for me, like, last time we talked, we talked about hacking time. It's always been about, like, looking at my time in the larger, larger context. So I have a magical AI subroutine, and a lot of the prompts that are in here have to reference my entire life. Right? So I've got this coach thing, like you saw that earlier, that just goes through and shows me like that morning's coach. But then I have a whole magical. So and it, you know, it'll create affirmations based on my life that it sends me throughout the day. So it'll text me this and say, hey. Don't forget. This is really important to you. Kind of like a a super high level of what I was doing before. Mhmm. But the magic is kinda cool. So I actually taught it to do tarot. So it'll go through and do tarot based on that day, and then give me a little tarot reading. It's kinda I'm funny, but, I mean, that's really fun. And then I built an entire, deity subroutine. So basically, if I wanna summon a god from, you know, basically any of the world's great religions and pray to it, it pulls in the date information and then the prompt automatically inserts the summoning, and then you can just ask the god a question. So tell me how my interview is going so far, talking about my quantified life. And then it'll go ahead and you'll see that it'll actually send up, you know, please summon, Bridget, you know, the Celtic goddess associated with fire and sun. It'll then do the summonsing and then she'll appear. And then it'll go ahead and and Bridget, what our god will have will go ahead and answer me. Mhmm. Yeah. So it's listening through that pendant that you have Yeah. That you're saying and collects the information and the the AI is creating those feedback about it. Yeah. So, I mean, it's it's come a long way from where I first started. I mean, the fact that I've got a pantheon, and it's doing tarot for me and, you know, it controls the house, you know. Like, my entire house is also connected, but instead of being connected to me like it used to be, now it syncs to the seasons. So throughout the year, the lights, the sounds, we've got smells and things just slowly move to the next one. It's it's wild. Yeah. What what is that dependent pendant call if people wanna know? Ai. Limitlessai. Okay. Yeah. I think the website is limitless.ai. I don't quote me. But if you Google limitless pendant, it'll come right up. Gotcha. Yeah. The hardware is one thing, because there's also just a PC piece that'll sit on your PC and listen to you. Mhmm. And they've got the whole service around that. It'll read your calendar, but then they've got the hardware that you Yeah. It's not always in front of your PC, obviously. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. It feels like we're entering, some sort of a technology renaissance that, let's say, the years 2000 to 2020 were kind of the dark ages of technology where we were exposed to mostly the negative side effects of technology and social media, etcetera. But now with AI becoming more advanced, these technologies and tracking devices becoming more advanced slowly, we're able to again, you know, not only improve our environment, like you said, that you have a house that automatically changes according to the seasons to be, you know, let's say, more attuned to your natural biology. Exactly. The light even even the circadian rhythm is, like, automatically changing the the light. I didn't. What we also do because the the type of light throughout the year changes. I mean, you know where you're from. Alright? So it looks a lot different. The sun the midday sun summer versus the midday sun, in winter. So, yeah, I mean, it's it's remarkable. I mean, I still can't get over how far we've come. You know, I'm almost 60 years old. So thinking that how different the world is gonna be in just five years when it's 2030, I I don't think people are ready. I I really don't. Yeah. When do you think we'll have, you know, like a Jarvis, like an actual AI Jarvis in our maybe another phone, but a watch or, necklace or whatever thing? I mean, I mean, I've said this for since 2015. I can't imagine a lot of people are are using smartphones. Like, they use them now within five years. I can't imagine smartphones being Mhmm. Like, something that everyday people would want to use, considering, you know, everything that's happening with insertables and wearables. Mhmm. You know, I why would you? Or, you know Right. Just considering, like, between my watch, my pendant, and my glasses, you know, I've got a whole ecosystem of data biology and behavior collection algorithms that are running that just ten years ago would look like I was from the future. So Mhmm. Again, if if you had something even smaller, you know, to your point or Jarvis or something, they could coach you throughout the day and actually act on your behalf more agentic. Mhmm. Agentic toward you. Like, hey. Can I help you with that? Or, hey. You might consider this. I mean, how is that not two years from now from being, you know, pretty normal, within three to four years being like, oh, a lot of people are using it. And within five, it's just you I don't know. I I used to say if you're using a cell phone at twenty thirty, you didn't make the cut. Mhmm. But we'll see. Yeah. Well, of course, there's people who are not willing to adopt new technologies, and, there's people who will adopt them. So I think the, you know, let's say, the gap between the two will be increasing exponentially as well that as the technology becomes more advanced. I would even struggle with that if you really think about it because, I mean, if you look at life in America right now, a lot of a lot of Americans, you know, for as polarized and divided and awkward as our country has become our our have adopted new technology. It's not that they didn't. Mhmm. They're it, but it's more like the the technology adopted them. Mhmm. Yeah. And I think that's really the big difference in 2030. It's not who didn't use the technology. It's who's being used by it. You know, the same thing we've been saying for the longest time about social media and things. I still can't believe we're still having that conversation. Here where I live in New York, they just banned cell phones in school. Are are cell are phones allowed in schools where you are? I haven't paid attention. But it's, I I would, you know, I I you obviously can't use them during class, but you can still use them in the in the recess. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I I I think it's, it's just I've just I was I was asked to go speak at a school a couple weeks ago in Buffalo, New York, and and the whole state has just banned cell phones. And then one of the parents said, you know, you're very connected and blah blah. What do you what do you think about this? And I said, I think it's a great idea if it were 2013. But I think in 2025, taking away cell phone from a a child in tenth grade is a is abuse. That they don't know how to function without it. Right. So it it's gonna be interesting to see what happens Yeah. With things like that. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices, which are the bond charge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes. They do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin antiaging, hormone optimization, pain management, and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes. Especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the bond charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most rheller Therapeuticers don't have the right wavelengths of light which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Bond Charge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research and they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code SIIM, s I I m, for a 15% discount. Obviously, there's gonna be, like, implants, and, in some countries, you can already have a implant for, you know, bank transactions or, key cards, etcetera. And, you know, I think two years ago or something like that, there was the first human patient who got the Neuralink. When do you think something like that will become more widespread opposite? I still think obviously, implants. I mean, I've I'm a I'm a big fan of Sweden. I spent half the year in Sweden, most of the twenty tens. I still think things like Neuralink are probably a little bit further out from mainstream. Yeah. Obviously, you'll have biohackers, you know, you've got, you know, your famous cyborgs that have have, you know, I, Neil Haberson has had, like, an implant in his head forever. Right? Sensing colors. But I I I just I can't imagine that becoming what I call pedestrian. Like, you know, it would just go to the Apple Store for an implant. I just don't see that sort of thing happening. Yeah. I well, not in my lifetime. Okay. Fair. Yeah. I can be medical grade for a really long time. I think there will be some people who are very specialized in their particular line of work, scientists or quants, who will need that just because of the the degradation and the ability to communicate when they can is is so much slowed down with typing or speaking that having a link directly to it would make a lot more sense for some jobs, but I again, I think that's gonna be highly specialized and probably twenty, forty at the soonest. Mhmm. Yeah. Something like, special forces operations or some policemen or, surgeons. Those things will probably, you know, you can they can I mean I mean, maybe we don't need implants if we got very good glasses or spectacles so that, the glass will become clear? And a lot of a lot of a lot of brain activity is sent through electrical impulses in your arm. If you remember the Myo band, I had one for a long time. It can sense what you would do with your hand. The Apple watch does the same thing now. So again, I I still think an eye movement is a big trigger for what's going on in your brain. I still think we're we'll have a lot more low friction ways of getting neurological feedback into the environment before we chipped. We we haven't even scratched the surface yet of what we can do without Yeah. The old screws in the head. Yeah. One thing we we you discussed last time was, hacking time. And, I find it actually very interesting because time is obviously, you know, the the most most, I I would say, precious resource we have that, essentially how long we live is a is a representation of time, of how long we've been alive and how long we will be expected to live. And time perception can also change or it can vary a lot between individuals. Sometimes time goes by very fast. Sometimes it's slow. And, you know, what we don't want is to just not only waste time, obviously, we can when we can waste time on social media and, you know, doing a lot of other stupid things, but, just we don't wanna have the time go fast. We wanna savor the good moments and, enjoy our life and have time go slow when we're enjoying the time. And, I don't think we're gonna I love it. I hate I hate to interrupt you. I love the fact this is everything we were talking about in 2018. Right. Yeah. So, you know, it's a good good to maybe, recap as well that, okay, how can we, you know, let's say, extend our time that make time feel go slower or not have time go that fast? Because one interesting insight of a research I've seen is that time the subjective perception of time speeds up as we get older. So that in your sixties, the years go by faster. It feels that it goes faster through various reasons, like brain aging and, you know, how you you become more accustomed to your daily routines, etcetera. But, you know, we don't want that. We don't want necessarily our time to go that fast. So, what can we do here with with, the help of technology? I mean, obviously, I mean, this is you know, I I always say to people who pay attention to my life with any bit of diligence, not as a novelty, because, I I think it's very easy to find me and my life as interesting or novel or, you know, I've had been I've had every, superlative and adjective used about me. But I think people with a more of a discerning eye will notice that, you know, literally between 2008 and 2015 was really about biohacking and hacking and understanding and changing my physicality. But '15, you know, to '19, possibly even '20 was really about the time. You know? It's I was literally doing a time tour when I was last on your show. Because to your point, I I felt that understanding your subjective your subjective experience of time is the most important thing you can do. You know, it's long before you hack anything out. You have to understand how you perceive the world around you through the lens of time. Your brain does it because it's circadian rhythm, and circadian rhythm drives everything. Right? So, like, if you don't really have, you know, you obviously can't talk to your circadian rhythm. You can through, you know, you can ambiently talk to it, but you can't, like, talk to your your super super charismatic nucleus, the the thing that controls the the your brain and when it releases hormones. But after that, I went through, you know, stage three or what I call it, which is just more of the esoteric of of the data. You know, like, how do you do these things and create, interesting things with it. You know, one of the things I did when I was, exploring your point about the subjective, version of time was try to help people understand that the what they were doing with their technology changed their perception of time. Right? And a lot of people, like, what does that even mean? And I had this great little chart that I created at that point, and it was really about understanding let me see if I can go ahead and share this. Kind of like a bunch of different apps that you would possibly come in contact with using a phone or using any type of technology and how they made your mind consider something. So temporary apps like, you know, where you get a, a security code sent to you, or Snapchat where things just disappear, you know, that live just forward in the in the ephemera of the future. They they have a very anxiety, provoking part of their nature. You know, you just go a little further out into what I call the soon. Right? You know, maps that tell you how far you are from something, how close you're getting, or reminders of appointments, also very anxiety provoking. But if you go way out, you know, a little further in the future and you look at, you know, things like a Google listing, it'll show you when something's busy. Not as anxiety provoking because you can actually plan that. So there's a there's a part of your future that's very much in your control that we don't really think about because we just take it for granted because it's just past the anxiety provoking part of the next three hours. And then you've got, you know, super far future, your death, and what happens after that, and how you deal with that. But your brain responds completely differently when you use technology referring to the recent. Right? So that's kinda like the temporary from the future, but just in the past. And those are like when you use your phone to like look for an app and it shows the things you've recently used or the things that thinks you want to use based on patterns. Or a lot of apps will show you what you've done, like, you know, hey, on this day you did these five things. Or apps that, like, really sum up your whole life or, like, photographs. And I think once you kinda get your head around it using apps in a very deliberate way to, like you said earlier, as you get older, things seem to speed up. Spending more time using things that slow apps, slow your brain down are super helpful. For someone like me, I have a lot of countdown apps. So, you know, in the future, this is coming up, but why I love them is they also count show me how far things are in the past. So I like watching things go away real slow that I was looking forward to in the future. Like, maybe it's a concert this fall. Like, it'll just count. I've got a bunch of them on my phone right now. Right? But I've been doing countdowns and countups for the longest time because I think they're so important for helping you get a hold of your brain and how your brain works. But I love watching something that I knew was far away in the future. Kind of come arrive and then slowly go and watch it get farther out. So this is just I can't really show that because the screen's not gonna know. But, you know, it's I'm looking forward to my, you know, my twenty five thousand year twenty five thousand days is, you know, four thousand days from now. Right? So, like, weird little esoteric kind of big things like that. You know, a big party at my hat, head at my house was, you know, one hundred and fifty two days ago on April 16. You know, I just, I love that. This makes sense. What I mean by like changing how you look at time, but you have to do it every day because everything around you is programming you to live in this next few hours, which will make you so anxious. Right. So looking at these okay. In five day or in in, let's say, forty five days, I'm going to this travel or this trip, whatever. So every day, you see it. Okay. Forty five, forty four, forty three, forty, thirty nine, etcetera. Looking at it every day slows down your perception. Slows it down. Right. Because it seems like, oh my gosh. I was just planning, you know, people who plan trips. I'm like, oh, I'm just planning this trip. Now we're on it. Oh my god. It was two years ago. Again, it's not that it came that fast or it it was that long ago. You didn't pay attention to any of it happening. Yeah. Yeah. And I did something for Spotify, and I don't know what year it was. I was visiting spot Spotify's offices in Stockholm, one of their offices. I'm sure they got millions of those offices. But I did something for them when they asked me about how they could help people with time, where I basically took the two types of time. So we live in chronological time, which is the what we all know days, weeks, hours, minutes. But before that, before eight clocks and calendars, and we just kinda lived with, you know, the land, the sun, the seasons, we had this thing called they called it Kairos time. But I went ahead and mapped all of their ability to manipulate someone's feelings of time in their interface for them, when I was visiting their office once and they loved it because again, how they recommend music to you is based a lot on behavior and mood and what you've been playing and, and actually what they wanna do with that is, is what interface they express it in. So temporal interfaces are a big, big, big deal for me. Gotcha. Yeah. So time feels like it goes by faster if you're not paying attention. If you're lost, I I guess, yeah, like, distracted or not paying attention to the further mood. You could also be hyper focused. Right? So not paying attention. Time travels super fast, but hyper focus travels super fast too. You know, working on something that you're really in. I mean, you know, you end up with a bladder infection because you need to pee, but you totally forgot because your whole biology was focused. I mean, every bit of energy. Yeah. That's a slow state. Right? Get so hung. Yeah. Flow a 100%. Right? There's no time and flow. But people like and then people want that. I'm like, you know, I I love flow state. I love that feeling, but I think it's kinda like heroin. You have to have the smallest hits of it because Mhmm. Flow is all very isolating for you when it comes to your ability to socialize. And we know if there's, you know, if the number one thing is, you know, you know, your ability to understand and process time, number two will be your, process people. Yeah. You know, biohackers are very lonely people. Yeah. What about meditation? So, like, I often feel that, you know, meditation does speed up time or it feels like it I don't know. Like, it creates this weird state that, you know, if you're in a meditative state, you seem to come out of it and, you don't really remember what it was is going on that much or, you know, it's it's yeah. Like, the time does, in my experience, feel like it goes by faster if you're meditating in, like, a really deep meditative state. But meditation in some ways can help you to also be more attentive in your everyday life. You become more mindful about things. And if you slow down, you become, let's say, mindful in the present moment. You know, I'm currently standing. I can feel the the floor underneath my feet, and, you know, I can sense certain things, light, sound. And if I become super attentive of that, be become very mindful of that, then it does slow down the the time. But if I were to be in a completely meditative state, then, it would go by faster. So what is there, like, some sweet spot of, okay, meditation is good? In some situations, do I need to be always mindful or yeah. What is your thoughts? You know, mindfulness is is a hard one because, you know, in 2014, I started meditating pretty heavy and doing isolation tanks. And by 2015, I was doing, you know, ten day silent retreats. By 2016, I was, you know, hardcore meditating a couple hours a day. You know, first, you know, hands down, there's nothing more important you can do than have a relationship with your mind. So meditating in any way that you feel, you know, there's a million ways to do it now, or there's a million apps, there's a million different, you know, mechanisms that'll help you do it. But I will say, you know, I just wanna put this out there because I I don't think I ever was clear enough about this. I do think there's a line you can cross with meditating where, you know, there's a there's a phrase in that we called the dark night of the soul. Are you familiar with this? Yeah. Where you get to a point where it can become almost terrifying to be as aware of awareness. Now there's a point past it. Right? You can but a lot of people I especially think today, people who don't meditate or have never meditated, it's not something you're just gonna start and like, you know, I know a lot of people, but you have to be real careful because if you're used to being distracted, working with your mind can feel like an assault. In the opposite way, giving someone your full attention can feel like an assault. I know for me, when I work with the public or I'm I'm speaking to someone or I'm in a in a social environment where I have a lot of people interacting with me, I have to almost pretend to be distracted so they don't feel overwhelmed. Because if you give someone your full attention and you know what attention is, it feels uncomfortable to the receiver. Does that make sense to you? Mhmm. It's like if you're being intimate with someone and you look in their eyes, you know that connection where your eyes just lock? Mhmm. You know, that's that's that's mindfulness. Right? That's that's that's using the mindfulness and awareness of that moment. Yeah. Sorry if that's creepy. Yeah. What about daily routines? So, if you let's say so, you know, the one of the reasons, the time goes by faster is that your brain wants to preserve energy and, you know, your brain doesn't care about how fast time goes by you for you subjectively. So, just, you know, let's say, following the same routines every day, eating the same things and following the same path to work, walking the same routes, etcetera. You know, I would imagine there is a lot of energy efficiency there so that you save a lot of energy and, your brain, you you you pay less attention to the things that you do every day. Like, you know, most people have the same routines, you know, they're they walk the same route without even thinking about it. They automatically do it, so they're skipping steps in the in terms of paying attention there. So I I would imagine that does speed up time alone. I mean, is it it's the law of energy conservation. Right? So it doesn't really matter whether it's your body, your brain. Everything's always trying to conserve energy. You know? Yeah. But in a 100%, I mean, routine allows you to expend your life longer. Right? But it also allows you to not pay attention to your life. So, you know, like everything, it's a fine balancing act. Right? If you pay too much attention to it, you can go crazy. But if you don't pay enough attention to it, it goes too fast. You know, for me, I I I personally feel like I've become really skilled at that balance of just aware enough to be with the moment, and not so much, that it overwhelms me. I think the hardest part about any type of journey, whether it's physically biohacking or spiritually biohacking or mentally biohacking, is just working with yourself enough that you don't go through people too fast. Right? You know, there's not enough talk about, in my opinion, social out you know, socialality, like, you know, being social with others as it relates to at what point are you allowed to dispense with people. Right? You know, a lot of people are like, you know, I've got lifelong friends or I'm I hear a lot, you know, people are so lonely and they can't find friends. And, you know, there's there's a real pathology about finding and keeping friends that we have as a species. You know, as if it's some type of medal of honor to say, you know, I've got all these friends and I've had them forever. And the reality is that's not healthy and that's not true. You know, to find a good friend and be with someone that you admire and you respect for the briefest amount of time, maybe it's an hour while you're sharing, you know, a bus station conversation. You know, some of the best friends I've ever had have been people who didn't last more than an hour at an airport when we were talking to each other. Right. And I think that's important for people to know, like, the quality of your relationships is not defined by the length of their time. The quality of your life is not defined by the length of it. It's what you do with it in the moment you're in it, you know? Because listen, no one's gonna remember your drama from last week, a week from now. And neither should you. And I wish we spent more time on, like, the richness of people comes from the immediacy of what you do while you're with them, not with the you know, if you and I were to define our relationship on our last podcast and what we did with our lives between now and then, you know, we'd be pretty shallow people. You know? The richness of this conversation is what defines us. Right. Yeah. Are there any, I guess, you know, let's say, little reminders or notifications you have in your toolbox to, you know, I guess, change routines, or or do you even think about it, or do you just? Oh, yeah. I mean, yeah. I mean, I've got a million little things. I've, you know, I've got, you know, shortcuts to text people to tell them I'm thinking about them. You know, some of the more provocative social, hacks that I use for relationships are the people I'm closest to, are blocked on all social media and have been since, you know, for the last fifteen years. My spouse and I have never seen each other online. I have no idea what my spouse does online. I have no idea what music my spouse listens to, what friends, what conversation. I don't know. My closest friends, the people I've known, for the longest time, were not connected to me online. And they they wanted to, you know, for the longest time, but I said no. And then I also don't connect to people online, so I only connect to ideas. So, like, I'll follow, you know, groups on Facebook or on LinkedIn. I'll only connect to someone in business way if I've actually met them. It's just where I am. And I think that well, it sounds weird. What you'll find is, again, with technology, it's become way too easy to consume another person's life as if they're content. Somewhere between 2012 and 2015, people disconnected social relationships, and combined it with passive consumption. And social relationships re require synchronous conversations like we're having now. Right? This podcast will be completely different if you'd text me yesterday and I'd answer a question today, and then next yesterday, you text me a question and I answer it. Right? It doesn't work. But we expect our relationships to work when we have asynchronous communication. So I think that's a biggie. I I loved reminders on my phone for the longest time, you know, reach out to so and so. One of my favorite kind of time plus social hacks is putting a calendar appointment in the future for yourself, and reminding yourself like, hey. Today is, 2028. You had a, you know, podcast, sixty three, and now you're having podcast, whatever, a 100 and some. You'll probably be on podcast two fifty. So make sure you reach out. And you know, what's crazy is you'll forget that appointment's there. And by the time it comes, it's kind of this weird synchronicity that and synchronicity is another time thing you can do, working with mindfulness and awareness, where you're like, oh, it's just, you know, people like it's a coincidence. No. Not not usually not. Usually, I had some hand do that, but does that make sense? So those are some simple hacks that I think, you know, reminders, future appointments, and then not Yeah. Acting to people you actually care about. Yeah. Yeah. What about, your routines? So so I've I've I've, like, experimented with a little bit over the last few months that, you know, I live a very routine lifestyle that I, you know, write a lot, I make a lot of videos, you know, work a lot, etcetera. And I've tried to okay. On some days, I'm just gonna, you know, break it up. I'm gonna do something different and follow a different routine. And it does, you know, in some ways feel like time goes by slower, because of, you know, it's a new thing. We talk about the energy efficiency, so your brain is forced to exert more energy again to pay attention to the task that you're doing. Right. So are you doing anything something like that that you just I don't know. I know. Yeah. I I I you know, it's a old calendar productivity hack, but I've been I've time blocked my life for a long time where there's certain periods of time where I do things during the day. You know, because my life in the system that I shared with you earlier is really driven by this sense of values. So I, you know, these these core values, health, home, service, work, finances. I I automatically think about those, you know, when I'm doing something. So while my time is a lot looser and and less structured than it used to be, I'm also at an age where I I can be. You know, I don't have to be at a specific job at a specific time. And I'll make time in the future for something that's very family focused or something that's very community focused. A lot of the work that I get hired to do in the last five years is really about taking a lot of these technologies and focusing them on large groups of people. And I'm when I'm doing, you know, communities, cities, states, counties we have. So but I haven't done any, like, break the routine habits or or experiments, in in a long time. I used to do a lot of those because obviously breaking a routine, especially if it's a bad habit, is super important. I I do I I do commend you for for doing it. I just I still can't get over how much different you sound now than twenty eighteen When I was explaining to you kind of time and time hacking and I almost felt like he must think I'm crazy. And now to hear you talk about it as if it's so normal, you know, it's like, ah, it makes me kind of happy. Sorry. I don't mean to make this about you. Yeah. Well, I I mean, I think, you know, these things, become more aware of them as you get older, myself as well. How old are you now? I'm 31. That's exciting. Yeah. So, yeah, we had our first conversation seven years ago. I was 24 back then. So, yeah, you know, I'm I'm not saying I'm, like, old, but, you you know, I'm seven years older, so my perception of the world has changed, quite a lot. They say, you know, your brain fully matures when you're 25, so maybe there's been, like, a little bit late twenties, you cross the bridge of, you know, I call it the psychosis bridge where, like, if you haven't become psychotic by your late twenties or late thirties, you're fine. Right? Most Mhmm. Schizophrenia and disassociation happens in that fear of things. But everything specifically for you, you know, if you spent seven years and you've been doing your podcast at that point before I even met you, you know, you'd I was episode six. I just thought that it was, like, maybe a few months when I started. Yeah. So, you know, you also have just a world of experience of talking about things that most people I think a lot of people don't even consider. So, you know, I think you're probably aging, you know, in in a level of wisdom faster than maybe your peers, which can be, you know, lonely, I would I would think. Right. Well, I'm I'm I'm married, so it's good to, Yeah. So it's, it's gonna be, or is it's not, like, obstacle in the sense of Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Well, good. Well, hopefully, your spouse keeps you grounded and because I I know that one of the things that I did when I got married in 2018, I got married in February 2018, was I made sure that I allowed my spouse's point of view, which is completely different than mine. You know? Mhmm. Undocumented, unplanned, unmanaged, unexamined, you know, all of those things. You know? You you it's best if you're someone who likes these things to have a chaos agent, at at close at hand. Right. Yeah. That can be a puppy if you don't have a partner. A puppy is a good chaos agent. Yeah. Well well, my my wife, we have similar lifestyles that we're both into health and longevity, but we do have a puppy as well. So that's the the chaos we do right now. What what what what about you? So how has your perception of time changed as you're, you know, reaching your sixties now? Well, first, I mean, it's gonna sound completely, like, out there. But I'm really struggle with the fact that people who are my age don't look like me. Mhmm. So I'll meet people in their late forties and fifties, you know, definitely in their sixties who just look so old. So I think it's a little bit weird for me to function a world where I have to be biologically 60, but I sound and look twenty or twenty five years younger than I am. It it almost is disassociative at at times because I don't know how to relate to those people. Because when I look at them, my mind starts thinking treat them like an old person. Mhmm. It's just the way I was raised. I mean, it's not anything you know, I hate to say I'm not being rude. But then I have to go, wait a minute. That's me. So I mean, I you know, when you think about time perception, I have to deal with that. So one of the things I do, and it's gonna sound just out there, is I do practice being an old person. So I'll ask for help, like, at the grocery store. Can you put these things in my vehicle or or help me lift something? I'll ask for all sorts of assistance. Can you read something for me that I, you know, it's just I could probably read it if I just, you know, put my glasses on and, like, took a second. I and I've long maintained that practicing being old helps you become old. That if you just wake up one day and say, why can't I lift this amount of weights? Why can't I go out and run this mile? Why am I not as virile in bed? All of the things that come with aging. Right? It'll probably kill you. Right? So, I think that's been super important for me, to just make sure I allow myself to be as old as I am, regardless of how I feel and look. Because a lot of people also have this age bias, like, where you can't be old, you can't act old. And again, there nothing kills you faster than self judgment. So for me, like, not judging myself, because listen, no matter how well I treat myself, no matter how mindful I am, no matter how good my diet is, and no matter how strong I am, I will age. It is just part of life. Right? Mhmm. So, you know, getting okay with aging has been a really super important thing for me for about five years. Mhmm. And then also, you know, understanding death and thinking about what does that look like and how do I deal with it? Because again, I could have the most I have the most loving spouse, but at the end of the day, I have to die and I have to die alone. Which means I have to really be okay with my mind. Right? And it took me a long time to realize that I will die young in my brain. I thought at some point I would be an old man. I'm sure at some point you would feel 30. You know, unfortunately you're never gonna feel 30. You're never gonna feel 41. You're never gonna feel 51. Right. It's just not, it doesn't happen. You know, our brain is our brain for a reason. And if you're under some illusion that one day you'll be a grownup it's you won't. You know? So Mhmm. Get okay with that thing you call you, and you'll be better. Yeah. And a lot of, let's say, suffering and I mean, that's a diff that's different from pain, but suffering is a lot of, you know, of of like, a mental framework as well, the perception thing. Yeah. Buddhism, we call in Buddhism, we call it dukkha. Mhmm. So dukkha, pain of life is dukkha in in Buddhism and Sanskrit. And, you know, it comes from striving or, you know, wanting, needing, you know? Right. You know, and wanting, needing, striving comes from not living non judgmentally moment by moment, which is the definition of mindfulness. So yeah. Yeah. I don't know. I think the strangest thing that's like is and this could sound so much fun. I I'm gonna love saying this, but how fast I can just bring an outrageous an outrageous amount of clarity to a situation. You know, I work with, like, huge cities. Right? And all of a sudden, there'll be all these people with all this stuff. Like, what about this? What about this? And I'll just, like, drop some, like, crazy nugget. Like and I don't know where it comes from, but I do think it has to be practicing working with myself. Don't you think? I mean, I do think there's some type of almost environmental control that comes with some some level of awareness that almost seems otherworldly. I think Steve Jobs in some ways had the ability to shift time and shift perception. You know, a lot of stage craft is energy, you know, working with a crowd. I'm sure you've done a bunch of talks by now. Right? Right. So, yeah, I don't know. I'd I'd makes me excited for, like, what does life even look like in the future if this continues to grow at the same rate that it's been growing. You know? Yeah. Do I get a wizard's robe at some point? Yeah. What about do you think it do, like, some, technology would be able to so one idea I've had is that, okay, maybe in a few decades or a fifty years or something, there's gonna be, you know, VR that is, you know, indistinguishable from reality. And in the VR, you know, obviously, you can just control how fast the time goes by. So you can be, like, one minute inside some sort of a VR simulation, which in the real world, as we call it, what where we are right now, it would be only one minute. But in the VR, it's gonna be, you know, five hundred years, for example. So you can Be able to do that sooner than that. Probably just with, once we get better understanding sleep, you know, because you can have a lot of time happen in in or at least what you think in a dream. So I Yeah. You know, I I I I don't know. I believe that and I'm sure you've had a lot of sleep hackers on and a lot of dream hackers. I mean, based on what your show just talks about, I'm sure you've had that. So I'm sure VR, I think they'll be able to do that. But again, you'd also have to probably be you know, the VR would have to be so immersive in a way that almost took away your senses. So I I'm not sure how that would work. But, yeah, I like I like where you're going with that. Yeah. So, you know, maybe the so there's a lot of people who are interested in life extension and this longevity escape velocity to make people live hundreds of years and immort to reach immortality even. So maybe maybe part of the answer is just, you know, being in a VR that feels like immortality, but in the VR, it's, you know, let's say one year. For in the real world, it's a one year, but in the VR, it's immortal. That's for some longevity people on the schism. I don't think death is optimal. I think death is required to be remain Correct. Again. I I want it. I'm pro death, but, you know, I'm, I moved to a state where death is actually assistant if, you know, at end of life. We also allow you to have green burial, so we don't have a cremation. But, no, I I think maybe I'm a little bit different than biohacking and longevity people because I, you know, I I unlike Brian Johnson, I don't think death is a is a disease that needs to be cured. I think that is a disease. You know? Right. And there and there's something about time perception is is hinged on mortality. Yeah. So I'll just leave that there without getting too ugly about people who believe that dying is a is a is a mistake. Right. Yeah. I mean, we can, you know, discuss the deal. That's good debate. Yeah. The ethic ethical, implications of that, but, you know, as as of, like, just the pure physics of it to, No. No. No. That's where I think I was going with that. I'm sorry. I got off track. Yeah. I I I don't know. I also think, you know, I don't even know what this would look like, but, chemically, I'm sure we're gonna be able to do things with time and time perception. We already do. I mean, well, you know, with, you know, drugs for different neuro neuropathologies with a known you know, whether you've got ADHD or PTSD, we're only working with some of that. So, I mean, that'll be really interesting. I I kinda like the fact that I might have went a more natural route with my time perception. I just you know? But it was it felt like I was on drugs sometimes, especially if I have to, like, five, six, seven day retreats where you don't speak or look at anyone. You know, it's like, oh my gosh, like what happened? I don't even know. You know, like, I remember one time I came home from a ten ten day retreat and it was like an hour ride from Spirit Rock back into San Francisco. And a friend took me to their house to stay for a couple days so I could re come back into life. Right. Because we had not spoken for ten days, not wrote, not had a watch, not don't have time, don't have, you know, just your Yogi job, and the rest of the time you're meditating. And I'm standing in my friend's kitchen trying to open a jar, and I couldn't remember how jars worked. I couldn't remember to hold it and twist. I had been so detached from, like, my reality for so long, and my friend said, do you still have a case? I said, yeah. I don't know what to do with this. And they said, you know, it's just charge to open. I'm like, I can't remember how that works. It was just so disassociative in that moment. And I'm like, wow. To be that far from to be or I guess that inside, you know, and then to be that aware that you don't know how to do something, you know, but even then I had to, like, slowly go out, like, go outside for an hour or two and see people just doing regular things. And I didn't even speak for the first thirty minutes after I got picked up. And my friend who had done a bunch of retreats at the time said, this is okay. You'll be fine. You know? Mhmm. Have you done any long retreats? I haven't done any silent retreats or something like that. Yeah. Yeah. That's but it's, yeah, for sure, like, very interesting because, you know, it's a sense and, you know, sounds and the speaking, they changed our perception of the world. And if you, you know, artificially lose it by voluntarily abstaining from it, then, you you imagine if you could just if you never smelled anything, you know, for ten days, you didn't smell anything. Your perception of the world will be quite different, I think. Yeah. You brought us something really cool. When I was a teenager in the eighties, there was a, I have it on the shelf. I don't know if you can see it. Let me see if it's, it's back here somewhere. See it. It's on this side. It's real small. See these little cans right here? Yeah. So this was called Moroccan Spice. And they sold this at a place called, Evelyn and Crabtree, which is a European, apothecary that we had here in The United States in malls in the eighties. I think they might even still be around. Long story short, I used to buy this Moroccan spice as a teenager and just put it on my pillows in my room, spray it in the air. I was one of those weird kids that, like, their bedroom. Every kid I think is like this to some extent, but my bedroom was like a sanctuary. Like, it didn't look like the rest of the house. The lighting was different. I had, like, strange music playing all the time. But I still to this day will I have an eBay alert. And when It's 09:00. When I find this spray, I'll buy it. So you're really expensive. And then what I love to do is just randomly every now and then just spray it in the air and be able to, like it takes me so quickly back to to being a teenager in my room. I know it's kind of a a weird thing, but find some scent that you grew up with that's hard to find, acquire it, and time travel. It's the coolest thing. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, looking at old photos, I guess, also is one one way of doing that. Especially nowadays, those old photos are such high resolution. My old photos had to be scanned. Yeah. We can start wrapping up, but, what are some things people, you know, can do on a daily basis to, let's say, make technology better for them in terms of, you know, the perception of time plus their mental health and just quality of life? What kind of small things that people can do? Gosh. Small things. You know, I think depending on if you're on an iPhone or Android, they each call it something different, but work with focus modes on your phone. So focus modes allow you to replace icons and wallpapers and just all the settings with a quick switch, so you can have like a work mode or a home mode. Work with that. I think that's like one of these fun things because it allows you to switch context. And a lot of our lives is dictated by how our phone is talking to us. A lot of people use that for what I've called productivity hacking, but it's great for just mind hacking. Count ups and countdowns, there's a million apps for that for your computer, for, your phone. You know, setting those, working with them, watching them, setting one, another fun one, make an appointment with yourself whenever you're listening to this podcast for one year from today. Right? And write yourself a note in your calendar. I promise whatever you write, it will come true. So make sure you write something good. But I think most importantly, just, I don't know, be okay with not being okay. I mean, I've spent my entire life, you know, wondering what happiness look like, why I was so fucking happy. I couldn't see straight. And and it wasn't till I said, okay, I have to be okay with wherever I am. However I am and just show up for that. It was kind of the biggest hack in the world and that didn't take a lot of technology. Yeah. Yeah. There's a little yeah. You know, technology can be useful and it can be very helpful, but, you can also get lost lost in it. So it comes down to how you use it. Yeah. Yeah. I've I've I I try to be a good grandpa cyborg. Yeah. Well, it was great to talk with you. Before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and your work? My gosh. I I don't do much online anymore. When I speak nowadays, it's usually to talk about, you know, this type of thing in community at the community level, but just, you know, chrisdancy.com is my website. I don't do a lot on social media, so like, you're not gonna find a bunch of biohacks. I have a YouTube, but it's usually just like me talking about something I'm working on. So I don't do I mean, most of the times I do stuff that's through interviews like this. It's hard because, like, I'm an old cyborg. You know? No one wants to talk to old cyborgs anymore. Need to get a new up updated exoskeleton. Cyborg. Yeah. They really do. But it it's it's been a it's been good. I've had a really good life, and I'm really I'm really proud of me. Mhmm. Well, it was, yeah. Great. We'll put the links in the show notes. My last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you adopted sooner? Don't be afraid to find new friends. That's it. Like, you know, like I talked about earlier, just don't be afraid to ask people to get out of your life or just stop dealing with people. And you know, for so long, I kept people in my life who were more interested in being me than being with me. And that's, you know, you never get a second. You can't get that time back from people who just who wanna be you. They have no desire to be with you. Yeah. That's yeah. Insightful and friends are, yeah, quite important Yeah. As well. Don't yeah. Don't don't be afraid to cycle them. It was so good seeing you. I appreciate you having me on again. Yeah. It was great to talk. And I'm gonna take the old show, and I'm gonna take this show, and I'm gonna pull the text out of them and and compare and see how I've grown. I'll send you the link when I'm done. Alright. Sounds good. Well, thanks for coming, and, I'll see you around. Thanks.