Gotta be a certain tipping point. Once you hit a certain age, it's like if those cancers haven't begun forming yet, the telomeres can possibly limit how much they can grow, but then you also got to think about some cancers can actually get a mutated telomerase enzyme and they can actually add the telomeres back on. But I feel like most of these super sleepers you hear about, they're like functioning completely normal just literally on two to four hours of sleep. Tyler, welcome back to the show. Thanks so for thanks so much for having me on again. Excited to, dig in. Yeah. A lot of people were very interested in our last episode where you shared about how genetics influences, how people react to different supplements, popular supplements out there, and, even, like, common foods. So, yeah. I wanted to do a follow-up to, you know, discuss these things, further. But, we, before we, schedule that we also agreed that we're gonna talk about one particular study that came out recently, which was quite interesting. It was, on the longest living, woman at that time and she passed away and they did a study on her before she, passed away at the age of 117. So, there was quite interesting findings, from that study that they, discovered about her genetics. So we'll, discuss a little bit about it. So what was your, like, overall impression of that, particular study? Yeah. I mean, it was really interesting. You know, I think it first makes sense to kinda touch on the whole, you know, multi omics aspect of it. Right? So if you if you're listening that aren't aware, you know, omics are studies of different I guess we could call them layers, right, of biology, you know, genomics or genetics. Right? That's what I'm a specialist in, but I'll be the first to admit as much as I love it. Right? It's just one piece of the puzzle. Right? We have things like transcriptomics or epigenetics, which can see, you know, how much of these genes are you making. But we know we turn genes into proteins. So there's proteomics. What type of proteins are actually being made? There's things like even exposomics. Right? That was the one they actually didn't do in that study where it's really focusing on different environmental exposures and things. So it's really layering on all these I like to think of them as chapters of a book. Right? That layer on on top of each other. It was pretty interesting how she wasn't universally, like, young all around with all these different measurements. Right? It's kind of the overall net effect of these individually smaller parts. Yeah. Yeah. That she had some good genetics or the genes that are associated with longevity, but but you also had some genes that were associated with, shorter longevity and increased cancer, but, you know, she still lived a very long time. Yep. So there's, you know, colony because in a lot of these cases, it's also luck, you know, when you're where you're born, what kind of, environment you're in and, you know, whether you get hit by a car or something like that. There's a lot of luck as well. Well, I wonder how many sanitarians. Right? Like, what super longevity people, you know, end up having their life cut short exactly due to the bad luck. Right? How many of you lose the car accidents that could otherwise be in that discussion? Yeah. But, yeah, one of the biggest surprising things I think in the study was, telomeres. So, she actually had short, telomeres, which, you know, telomeres are thought to be, I guess, markers of longevity that and that you need to have long telomeres to live longer, etcetera. But, she actually had quite short telomeres. So what do you think about that? Yeah. I mean, it's interesting when you think of it in terms of, like, we think of it in terms of, you know, regular aging. Right? Like, the the little like, the ticking time bonds or, like, the fuse for ourselves. Each replication gets a little shorter and shorter, but we also need to think about in the context of someone that's a lot older. Right? We need to think in terms of cancer. Right? So as these telomeres are really eroded, the cells at that point aren't gonna be replicating too much, but that can also apply to cancer cells themselves. Right? So the things that may have made her seem not as longevity centric, right, for the telomeres could be the same thing that starve off cancer. Mhmm. You know, I feel like there's gotta be a certain tipping point. Right? Once you hit a certain age, it's like if those cancers haven't begun forming yet, the telomeres can possibly limit how much they can grow. But then you also got to think about some cancers can actually get a mutated telomerase enzyme and they can actually add the telomeres back on. Right? So going back to the luck thing, it's like Mhmm. Perhaps maybe the mutations that she acquired. Right? We're all acquiring mutations and, you know, you could say forming little cancers right all the time. But if they didn't add on that telomerase, right, they're not gonna be able to grow that much because just like the healthy cells in the body, that fuse is very very short and eroded. Yeah. That was one of the theories that why did she didn't or she she had actually other genes that increased her risk of cancer. Mhmm. So the short telomeres, might have been, yeah, like, adaptive, or like it turned out in her favor. In that, case that she had some genes that increased risk of cancer, but the shorter telomeres prevented her from, getting the cancer, which, yeah, is kind of a and that's a good luck example that, she actually had a pit you know, multiple of these, different genes. One of them being negative, but the other ones counteracted, those negative genes. Yeah. You know, she she there were, you know, some really interesting mutations that they kinda specifically mentioned. Right? I thought it was interesting that there were some linked to, cell adhesion molecules. I think there was one this one's a Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule. I'm pretty sure that's the name of that one. I'm trying to recall the other ones. There were two that were for cell adhesion molecules and you may think, right? Well, if there's a protein that makes cells attached to each other, why would that be linked to longevity? Right? But, normally, it's thought about, like, connective tissue. Tissue. Right? It's also important for brain function, but immune cells in order for immune cells to be activated, you know, they need to actually link up to each other and form what's called an immunological synapse. This is how we prime our immune system. And if you don't prime your immune system, I like to give the example of it's like, you know, they have those like cold case murder, shows where it's like they need to find the body. They get the bloodhound right a piece of clothing and goes and find it. That's how I like to describe, antigen presentation. Right? In order for your immune system to go and attack a cancer. Right? And destroy the cancer so it doesn't keep growing. You need to get a piece of that cancer, show it to your immune system, they sniff it, then they all get primed, you know, in the lymph nodes and then they're all exiting the lymph nodes and they could detect that cancer. So these cell adhesion molecules are actually would enable the immune cells to attach to each other in order to literally share that piece of clothing. Right? So it's thought that that was a way that also made her immune system hyperfunctioning. Right? But not too much. Right? Because then we get autoimmunity. Right? But we wanna make sure we don't have that deficit there. So that was something else that I thought was pretty interesting. And then to, like, the connection with the connection with mTOR that was there, you know, mTOR activation, that's what we want. We're trying to, you know, get big and build muscle, but it's that that balancing act. Right? Like, being too big evolutionarily, like, isn't great. But, one of the map kinases that she had, the map k mutations she had, that's one of the actual signaling molecules down into mTOR. Mhmm. So that may have been one of the reasons why as well. MTOR is, like, down here on the cell signaling, but up here, you have that map kinase that signals to it. So if that's doesn't work as well, in theory, it may have made adabolism a bit more difficult. But at the same point, that can be pretty protective for longevity as well. Yeah. You mentioned the immune system. So there are some of these certain genes as well associated with longevity that strengthen the immune system and, I guess, like, overall resilience. So, you know, some of them being, FOXO three and, others. Mhmm. So, I guess the question is, does having a strong immune system then could it be, like, one of the, you know, let's say, advantages for, overall longevity? Yeah. Definitely. And the the FOXO three, you know, that's when we have cell signaling, you have the surface of the cell. You have something that binds to the receptor. Then you have the secondary messengers, right, like the map kinases. And then at the end, right, how do the cells actually change their behavior? It's through these transcription factors. Those are what actually make different genes, make different proteins to change the cell behavior, and that's exactly what FOXO three is. So it's one of those transcription factors. And what's interesting too is that that actually also plays a role in mTOR as well. So you have I g f one signaling can kind of drive with the well they they oppose each other. Right? Because too much of that anabolism, I g f one, growth factors, growth hormone can activate that. That can turn off the FOXO three, you know, turn off some of these longevity genes and activate mTOR. So it's kind of that tipping point there. Right? Mhmm. But, yeah. The FOXO three, that's probably the most well studied variant for the longevity there. And it's she had some of those mutations there and it's like I feel like people think that these longevity genes just make you, you know, immortal. Right? But it's like Yeah. You could absolutely have, those FOXO three mutations that I put it this way. I've worked with people that, you know, aren't they don't seem to be these super graceful agents and they have the FOXO three. Right? Just confirming as well, you know, there's no one single longevity gene that guarantees these things. Right? Also where she was living, the food she was having, all these other things definitely play a role. The IGF one stuff is really interesting because we have when that even on the receptor level. Right? Whether it's the receptor itself or the transcription factor, we wanna think in terms of that whole signaling pathway. So if it's hyperfunctioning that I g f one, you know, that's linked to things like acromegaly. It could be linked to premature death and you can kind of somewhat compare it to, you know, growth hormone abuse. Right? And professional bodybuilding as well linked to shorter lifespan. But if it's not as active, I guess my point is whether you have a hypo functioning or less sensitive I g f one receptor or you have an overactive FOXO three transcription factor, they're essentially doing the same thing. Right? Because it's the same pathway. But this is where, you know, genetics moving from the laundry list of individual mutations to assemble in terms of the pathway. Right? Because what if you have the less functioning I g f one receptor? You have the better functioning MAP kinase that I mentioned for mTOR, and you also have the extra active FOXO three. That's three different points in the same pathway that are all shifting heavily towards that longevity side. Mhmm. Yeah. It's kind of interesting. You know, personally, I have so I don't know if it's genetic, but I have, like, very low IGF-one levels always. They're always, like, a 100 or below a 100. You know, it might be because of, doing a lot of intermittent fasting, so that might explain it. I'm not eating, like, a low protein or low carb diet. So those things are What's your normal schedule? Are you doing that, like, daily or a couple days a week? Like, extended fast? No. I do daily this, let's say, sixteen and eight or one minute of this type of, thing. But I'm eating, you know, plenty of protein and plenty of carbs and calories as well, so I'm not really restricted. So the only thing that could explain the low edge of one is either genetics or the intermittent fasting window. But I also I build muscle quite easily, you know, given that I do, like, one meal a day or two meal a day. I I have, like, decent muscle mass. And I I I do think that I have also like a strong immune system. Like, I've never I'm never like really sick. I've never I've lived in a molded house for two decades and never got sick. Wow. That that that's the real test right there. Wow. Yeah. Like I never got sick. So is you mentioning these three is actually exactly describing me. Which again but it but at the same time I have like no one in my family who has lived a long time. Like, no one in my family like grandparents and etcetera, has lived to over the age of 80. So they all, like, you know, have died in their seventies. But I do have, like, this kind of interesting, trifecta of longevity factors, that might be beneficial. But like you said, it's not just these genes. There's, you know, multiple factors. Mhmm. The environment. Yeah. You know, there's there's thousands of other genes that I might have that are harmful and, might also be beneficial. That's where it gets really, like, you know, overwhelming at times. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices, which are the bond charge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes, they do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin anti aging, hormone optimization, pain management and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes. Especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the Bond Charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most rhella therapeuticisers don't have the right wavelengths of light, which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Boncharge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research. And they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code SIIM, s I I m, for a 15% discount. The receptor mutations, those are personally my favorite types of mutations because they fundamentally change how you interpret labs. Right? How you interpret blood work. Right? Because, you know, I wonder if too, you know, the fasting definitely could play a role in the lower circulating IGF one. Right? But I also wonder too, just speculating here, if you have a let's just say you have a hypersensitive IGF one. Right? I wonder if there could be feedback loops. Right? Or even same thing if it was an androgen receptor. Right? If your androgen receptor is hypersensitive, I wonder if there could be possible feedback loop for certain individuals where your body is so much more sensitive to IGF one That your body has the feedback loop and says, well, that's enough IGF one signaling. We can either down regulate the receptor possibly or maybe lower the amount we're being producing. I would think it would probably be more so a receptor thing, but just trying to spitball here ideas for the lower IGF one there. Yeah. I might have, like, higher androgen receptor density. I I would suspect that. Do do you know if you have so the androgen receptors can have, CAG repeats. So that can, like, increase the sensitivity of them. Do you know if you have any of those in the androgen receptor? I haven't specifically looked for it. Got it. Got it. But, yeah. I I can maybe look at later. Yeah. Those are those are the you know, I feel like everyone has that one friend that from, like, you know, middle school. Right? They would kinda, like, eat whatever and just be, you know, super, super built. So you when you were younger, were you, like, prior to consistent weight training, were you kinda already, like, higher muscularity or more so were you a hyper not so much that, but you were a hyper responder to the training or more so normal response rates just doing the right things for long periods of time? Yeah. Well, I was before I started lifting, I was, like, a bit skinnier. But when I did start to lift weights, I built muscle quite easily. So I've always, like, had easy time building muscle, fast. So, like, I just eat more and, you know, just try to get stronger and I build muscle quite easily. Mhmm. But, yeah. I I started off, like, from a skinnier side of things. Got it. When I was Yeah. I was on the option. I was I was fat growing up. I I I was the endomorph on the other side of things. So I got to, like for you well, you're doing the fasting. So that's probably it's probably pretty difficult for you doing one meal a day to get too much in a surplus. Right? That's probably difficult even just putting that in your stomach to actually Right. But, like, when you do a bulk, you're not doing one meal a day. Right? That's probably more maintenance for you or a cut? Well, if I do a bulk, I would do a similar thing. Maybe I would add, like, some fruit or some more protein before. But, so it's not the specific one meal a day. It's, I have like a protein shake, in the morning. Yeah. Got it. Got it. Okay. Yeah. Like one and a half. So about it. Yeah. If it were the bulk then I would I would still, like, eat in the evening mostly. But, yeah. What about you? Like, have you have looked at yours probably quite thoroughly your own genes. Do you have, like, a Yeah. Longevity genes? Yeah. So I have I have one copy, of the FOXO three gene. Okay. And now the FOXO one can help with or help or hinder with insulin sensitivity. So that can kind of be that could be linked to insulin resistance. I have some of that there. So just me for myself. I've never been someone doing super I've always been more of a moderate carb. I just noticed if I'm really doing any more I mean, I'm six three like two thirty right now. Probably around, I don't know, probably 13% or so body fat. But if I even that, I'm doing maybe 200 grams a day. If I try to do I hear people around my size, you know, doing four, five, 600 grams. I notice pretty quickly like, kinda like over spilling. Right? It's not really getting partitioned very well. And then it's like, oh, well, you know, you have all this glucose disposal agents. Right? These sensitizing supplements, you know, your berberine, your cinnamon, your fenugreek, but all those are male inhibitors. So as we talked about in the past I'm really sensitive to those things. Right. I have a slow male gene. So a lot of these supplements that a lot of the fitness people say you know they help with nutrient partitioning which they do I've tried them. I notice I'm a lot more revved up, right, or energized. So I need to be very very very careful when I'm utilizing those. Right? A little too much methylated b vitamins or b vitamins with some of those. I notice I'm just overly wired. So it's for a really sensitive person. Sometimes it could be tough to get a lot of these proper nutrients in that people use because the limiting factor a lot can be, you know, the catecholamines and the overall nervous system stimulation. So FOXO3 is, essentially increases stress resilience, and there are certain activities as well that increase FOXO3 expression like, you know, fasting and exercise and cold exposure, etcetera. So, would it be then that people with FOXO like, higher FOXO three expression, would they be, I guess, more suitable to do those things like cold baths? And people who have lower FOXO three genetically, would it actually be harmful to them because their body is less resilient against the stress or is it something that you can just, yeah, adapt to if you do things that increase FOXO3? Yeah. It's a really good question. K. Because I'm try because I'm pretty sure that most of these mutations have to do with the FOXO three binding capability to the DNA. So I'm pretty certain it's that not so much that you have you have higher baseline expression. Right? Yeah. So if it binds more tightly and can transcribe these genes better yes. Interact I don't know if I would think of it as I would think that perhaps the people that don't have it, that don't have the higher binding, they may be more it might be more beneficial. They're gonna be restoring a deficit if that makes sense. Right? So utilizing the cold exposure, the fasting of these things can help bring that up more. But the people that already have the better functioning. Right? The higher binding capability to the DNA Yeah. I wonder if you could push it too far too. Right? Because it's like, who benefits more? Someone that is already high and is gonna go even higher and higher peak transcription. Right? Higher peak levels or the person that's lower than normal and we want to bring them up to a normal level at least. Right? So it's difficult to say. It's kind of depends how you look at it. Right? Do you want to just be already set longevity wise and just become a super soldier? Right? Or do you look at the people that say, wow. You really need this just to be normal. That of course. It's just one gene. Right? Yeah. But yeah. Interesting question. Hard to say for sure. Yeah. What do you think? Well, I yeah. You could you could make an argument or both ways that, people who are with higher FOXO3, they're just gonna get all the benefits from cold exposure and avoid all the side effects because they have higher resilience. But, yeah, people who have lower FOXO3, if they do their cold baths, then they get some also benefits. They might need to be more careful with not overdoing it. I guess just they might be able to tolerate less a little bit. Yeah. Because other factors come into play too. Right? Like, at least with the cold with the cold plunging. Right? Mhmm. Cold exposure, you also have things you gotta think about like the UCP one gene, that can actually be linked to people having a harder time, losing fat from cold exposure. So that's one thing a caveat to take into mind consideration. But a gene I've been looking more into actually found out highly mutated for myself and kinda finding that out. I've actually been doing a lot more, cold showers in the morning. The d b a the d b h gene. So this is the gene that actually converts dopamine into norepinephrine. So this gene, there's several mutations studied in humans that can lower its functionality. So this can mean higher dopamine levels lower norepinephrine or noradrenaline levels. So this can be linked to impulsivity, ADHD, just generally poor focusing overall. And I myself, you know, I can be impulsive at times like, oh, that's interesting. Let's just go check that out and it kinda ties into ADHD when people think it's all about, you know, I have low dopamine. But we need to think of each individual. For a lot of people with ADHD, you may actually have high dopamine but you have low you have low noradrenaline. So it's like, I have to think of it as dopamine is what drives initial interest in something. Right? Oh, I wanna start this project. I wanna sit down and start this work, but it's the norepinephrine. That's what really keeps you locked in. Like that's what nicotine stimulates the release of. Right? Nicotine doesn't really affect dopamine at all, but it could be great for focusing for people. Right? Because it raises the more deep focus there. So people talk about cold exposure, how it, you know, they compare it to cocaine. Right? How it jacks up dopamine. How it's, you know, it's like taking your Adderall every morning. This or that. Right? But dopamine goes up what I think two or 300%. Norepinephrine goes up five to 700% from cold exposure. So for really thinking about what really drives most of the cognitive focusing benefits of cold exposure. I would make an argument. I think norepinephrine is actually the main player not so much the dopamine. So if you have people I myself, I have several mutations in that gene. So I already have lower norepinephrine production. So when I do the cold exposure, I mean this is what I speculate. Right? There's no studies showing this would be a cool study. Right? People doing cold exposure you know they can do a cognitive task and focusing task. Right? With and without this genetic mutation to really see, does that help restore the deficit better? Right? I noticed it helps me immensely. Right? But again, kind of speculative there. But I've seen for people that I work with that there's a high correlation with ADHD there, poor focusing. So I will I mean not prescribe. Right? But recommend. Right? Even if it's a quick two minute cold shower. Right? Just start somewhere. And these are people that I've seen that in my clinical experience respond better to the cold exposure therapy. So it's like the FOX o three then there's also the UCP one gene. I mean, some people can get a little overstimulated doing the cold exposure, especially later in the day. So there's that aspect. But then also how much, you know, noradrenaline, norepinephrine are you making as well? Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. FOXO three is one of the, like you said, one of the most known longevity genes. And there was a recent, study on monkeys in China where they did stem cell therapy, and they gene edited some FOXO mutations. So they resulted in higher FOXO three expression from from the stem cell therapy in the monkeys. And, the monkeys had I I mean, I think the results weren't like that impressive. They, you know, did see a decrease in these, biological age clocks, but, you know, it's not a very significant result. And they there some of the organ function also improved, but not in all organs. I think, like, 54% of the organs improved. So just so I understand. So you said they gene edited. So they edited they edited the host monkey, like, systemically, like like like like I know. No. No. They had embryo? No. They had a human stem cells, and, they gene edited those I see. To, to, do some mutations on the FOXO three that it, reduced the breakdown of FOXO three. Do you know, were they were they introducing were they introducing a novel type of mutation, or did they induce a mutation that humans normally have? I exactly don't remember that one. But Yeah. Because I'm wondering too, like, the the the stem cells they got from the humans Yeah. Were those humans Who you know? Beneficial FOXO three genetics to begin with. Right? Like like, I wonder if you took the stem cells of that 117 year old woman. Right? If they took those stem cells versus someone else's stem cells. Right? Like, I guess my point is it's like if here's a line of, you know, the maximal FOXO three optimization genetics for a human being, were those stem cells just brought up to that? Or were they, like, you know Yeah. They did some mutation that may not even be super healthy to have in a human, but it just really blew that FOXO three out of the water. Yeah. Well, the the other monkey group, got regular human stem cells. And they saw some improvement in organ function, but they had, like, a lower result. So the mute so the gene editing did have some unique effect. Yes. From the same initial. So some some were unedited somewhere. Yeah. And then Yeah. Interesting. That's cool. There were some additional effects from the gene editing. But, yeah, I mean, the my question is gonna be that, you know, do you think that FOXO three gene editing, will it become, like, more popular in the future? Because, it's one of the most known ones. It's tough. You know? I did I did CRISPR, in my PhD with breast cancer cells. And I remember doing it. You know? I validated all the primers needed to cut out, you know, the one specific gene. Did all the validation of the cells and the target gene was gone but then noticed there was, you know, off target effects as well. Right? And it's again, you know, I was a scientist in training. Right? So like, did I mess something up perhaps? But the thing with gene editing for me is I feel like we can't be as certain as some people make it to believe that those molecular scissors aren't cutting anywhere else. Right? Like, you check the whole DNA for that. It's that'd be tricky. Right? Because then it's like with the gene editing. Right? You know, they're they're helping deafness. You know, all these actual I kinda word this. These real clinical diseases that are actually ruining people's health versus, you know, where do you draw the line with Eugenics. Right? Because if you're gonna be jacking up your FOX o three. Right? Like, that's where it's like I'm trying to think, would they would they be utilizing that for disease prevention? Interesting. Yeah. The gene therapy stuff it's it's interesting. Right? It's also scary at the same point. Right? Because it's also we need to fig think about when are we doing the gene editing. Right? Are we doing the gene editing, pre fertilization in the egg and sperm? Are we doing them with the embryo, you know, before they're an adult? Because the earlier you do it, if those mutations that you're changing, if they end up getting producing the gametes, right, the sex cells, those also get passed down, you know, generations. I know you probably heard about couple years ago, they did the I think there were twins in a in China where they did the gene editing. Right. And they made them, you know, immune to HIV. And then they said, oh, we actually found out too that, these kids are, like, super smart. Super smart. And in my head, I'm like, this is actually around the time when I was doing the CRISPR, in my PhD. And I was, like, with all the validation I was doing to make sure we're targeting the right gene, in my head, I'm, like, there is no freaking way. These very intelligent Chinese scientists, they knew they were gonna make those kids super intelligent. They just kind of, I think, proposed it initially as a noble cause. We're helping HIV. Right? Mhmm. You see what I'm saying? It's like Yeah. The Trojan horses, we're gonna fix a disease. But in reality, we're also making super babies. Right? Yes. So it's interesting. You you affect an HIV gene, but that's also expressed in the brains and makes them a lot smarter. And then what I think the main investigators, what, they just disappear. I don't think anyone found them yet. They I think they did it off the record. Right? It wasn't even properly funded. It was kind of, like, underground. They just did it, presented it, and they just disappeared. Yeah. Well, the guy is, he went to jail, but he's, out now and he's on I went to jail. Okay. He's he's on ex now. He's, like, posting, like, very physical stuff. Okay. I'd follow-up with that. Okay. Have your name more I've got other up other updates? I mean, those the twins should probably be, what, probably, like, six plus years old now at this point? I haven't paid attention to that. Yeah. But, yeah, I mean, he's on he's on x and, he's posting, like, some kind of philosophy philosophical posts, as well. But, yeah, that's kind of interesting. And another question I had on the in this context would be the telomerase. So you mentioned that, you know, it can be harmful for in terms of cancer. And in the last podcast, we discussed all these, you know, supplements that are harmful for some people because of genetics would then, let's say because in longevity space, there's also, like, okay, the misconception that you wanna have longer telomeres and, you take telomerase boosters, this kind of telomerase activator supplements. So with an peep for some people, it's not gonna be a good idea from due to genetics. So you're saying Well, they You're saying the you're saying in regards to cancer? Yeah. So the, you know, the the old woman, she probably was saved thanks to her Yeah. The telomeres. Yeah. I mean, it's really interesting. Right? Because something that we do need to think about that I think a lot of people in the supplement space don't talk about much, right, is if there are existing cancers in the body, right, that are also gonna be absorbing these nutrients. Right? I remember there was a study, I think it was with glutathione. I'm trying to remember if it was in vivo or an organoid study. But basically suggesting that that could potentially, you know, promote cancer growth. Right? Because it's these cancer cells are mostly our cells that are mutated in certain ways. And could some of these mutations make them, I guess, we'll use the word hungrier, right, for certain nutrients. Right? So it's something to really consider, but, like, what does that mean? Like, how far do you take that? Anyone before they take any natural supplement, they need a full body MRI, right, to check for cancers. Right? But even at that point, it's like you need a reasonably sized tumor to even pick that up on, you know, a full body MRI as well. So, yeah, I think it's be interesting to read more into But from a gene from a gene test, you know, let's say someone does their gene test, and they see they have, like, genetically higher risk of cancer, and their family members also died to cancer. So, for them, probably maybe taking a telomerase activator is not a good idea. Yeah. I mean, hard to say that definitively. Right? I know we can see genetically if someone is prone to shorter to shorter telomeres for sure. I'm trying to think if we have rigorous data for longer telomeres. I know definitely for shorter. It's tough. Right? Because it's like, do you want your cells to be lasting longer? It all and then it again, it also comes into the immune activation. Right? All these other factors as well because theory of the immune system is gonna be actually going and detecting these cancers, then the increased telomerase may not matter as much, but it's an arms race. Right? Cancers are always trying to evolve and evade. It's an arms race going back and forth. Right? So hard to say because I mean, a lot of these telomerase, you know, like vitamin e does it, vitamin d does it. Like a lot of these, we're not talking necessarily about super niche, you know, hardcore underground biohacker peptides this and that. Right? Right. A lot of these general supplements that the majority of people, take technically lengthen telomeres, but it all depends on where you draw the line because a lot of it's mechanistic right now. And with that logic, it's like, okay. So I'm not ever gonna take any vitamin d. Well, low vitamin d is like the cancers too. Mhmm. So, you know, we need to try to figure out, you know, I'd always tell people we're all chasing the perfect protocol health optimization, but there's really no such thing as the perfect protocol. You know? Because there's always gonna be some potential caveats, mechanistic things that could play a factor or maybe doesn't play a factor or maybe it plays more of a factor than you'll ever understand. So it's tricky. Yeah. Absolutely. I guess, you know, if there was a gene therapy for telomeres that you you know that, okay, it's going to make your telomeres longer. Mhmm. Yeah. It's a good one. And and it's, you know, safe. Personally, I wouldn't probably take it. I wouldn't either. Yeah. Even Yeah. I mean Even even if it was safe, you know, I would I wouldn't take it just from the, like, the understanding of the biology of aging. And it's my understanding of it that, you know, telomeres aren't that big of a role or big of a deal in terms of lifespan, in my opinion. It's more about, yeah, like the short term. Maybe if if you see that, okay, your telomeres are getting super short, then you can, like, maybe short term therapy to get them back to, like, a normal scale. But, I guess, yeah, like, hyper long telomeres are definitely not, like, a good idea. Yeah. Because we also gotta think to what's actually happening when the telomeres run out. Right? We're releasing a lot of this, you know, senescent secretome, this inflammatory secretome. But again, going back to if your immune system is more wired for anti inflammatory states. Right? Even though, like, this 100 set the super sanitarian. Right? She was I mean, I don't see why she wouldn't have been releasing some of this senescence secretome. Right? But again, if the immune system itself isn't gonna be reacting so excessively, then it may not really matter quite as much. And, you know, how would they determine a telomerase gene therapy is safe. Right? Like Right. I would wanna see like, we would need to test that. Like, I would need to see that everyone screened for circulating tumor cells. We need to validate that the people getting this do not have any detectable cancer. Right? I mean, I'm with you. I wouldn't be taking it either. But for the people that would think about it, it's like, you really need to make sure that there's as with as much as technology can prove there is an existing cancer. Right? Because it's like I mean, maybe they could do it in mice and also see. Right? If you do or or monkeys, if you do actually have existing cancers and then you get that gene therapy, what happens then versus if you don't have existing cancer? That'd be a really cool study. But, yeah, the longevity stuff, man. You really can be, playing with fire. Yeah. You pull one lever and then another lever pops out somewhere somewhere else. We don't even know what most of the levers are at this point either. Right? Like, we we would know Yeah. I think there's so much more that we don't know than we do know about health and science. I think it's gonna be that way for a very long time. I mean, AI is gonna help close that gap faster than we thought. Right? But Yeah. What about IGF one? So, like, low IGF one r is associated with longevity as well. If you could, dim down your IGF one a little bit, maybe not, you know, completely turn it off, but, reduce some of the expression Mhmm. Would you do that kind of a gene therapy? I feel like it might depend how much it would affect, you know, my ability to train and build muscle. Like, I love, you know, I love hitting the weights hard. Right? I like having the ability to, like, gain muscle if I wanna lose a little bit this and that. Right? So I think it I don't know if I would do a gene therapy. Right? Even, like, even these a lot of these cancer vaccines that are coming out and a lot of them aren't even mRNA mediated. Right? So it's like other mechanisms. It's because what if what if you're wrong? Or what if the science is wrong in your specific scenario? Right? Like, I think I think that's for me where where I draw the line. And, like, I think, you know, I mean, it's not biologic, but even with all the Neuralink stuff. Right? Like, as much as it would infinitely fold increase, you know, your work output and stuff, it's like that's really weird. Right? Would you would you get the Neuralink? Probably not like an implant. Yeah. But, you know, glasses or something like a Yeah. Wearable, you could you could turn off. Right? That'd be that'd be great. The monocle or what what's the the one eyeglass or something. And that, you You know, those those are gonna initially, I would, yeah, use those. They they have a that reminds me of the you see Dragon Ball z? Like, they have a little, like, scatter thingy. That's what that reminds you of the monocle. I know they had a monocle one. That that'd be pretty funny looking. Yeah. Or, you know, contact lenses or something like that. That's, I think very feasible. But, you know, in a lot of this, like, longevity clinics, you see growth hormone therapy and stuff like that. But, high growth hormone might have, like, negative effects on longevity. Yeah. So it's kind of interesting that why do they actually prescribe it in those clinics. Yeah. And I think too it's again, we do know there's people that are prone to lower growth hormone. Right? So this is also why I think it's important, you know, you can check the circulating growth hormone levels, but I think it's also important to see the synthesis of the growth hormone, those genes involved, the receptor sensitivity. I think it's really important to weed out, you know like, it reminds me, like, when I work with people with hormones. Right? Like, we can see, do you have a harder time making pregnenolone, making DHEA, making testosterone. Right? So Yeah. When someone comes to me with low testosterone, hormone issues, you know, I'm not against hormone therapy by any stretch, but for a lot of people, most people with hormone issues, it's lifestyle related. Right? It's the microplastics. It's the poor sleep. It's the junk food. It's the stress in your life. So it's like, I would rather Yeah. Could you just go on testosterone and feel better? Sure. But for a lot of people that go on these hormone therapies, they're kinda using it as a band aid. It stops working as much after a while. Right? There's these feedback loops. So, you know, if we can figure out if someone let's say if someone has a harder time making d h e a. Right? And it's not just based on one mutation. Right? The polygenic scoring I use is 48,000 snips for d h e a production. Right? So that's something I see be really accurate with blood work. Is your testosterone here lower because you can't make the ingredient as well? So if you can't make the ingredient as well, I would rather have you try well, check the blood work. Right? And a lot of times it correlates. I would rather have you try that, the actual missing piece for you, and then it could flow through into the testosterone. But if you're somebody that literally can't synthesize testosterone from DHEA as well, that's an individual I'll say, hey, you know, we could try to work on all these other things. But I do think testosterone placement therapy, you're an ideal candidate because it's actually a true genetic suppression. So take that over to the growth hormone. Right? Kind of the same thing there how my brain is looking at that. Right? If it's a true genetic suppression or the same thing can be true with the d I o enzymes. One and two. These are what convert and activate thyroid hormone in the body. So those two isoforms, if those are mutated highly mutated in people, a lot of times they have thyroid issues and similar similar lines I'll say hey even if let's say they have Hashimoto's a lot of inflammation going on even in a perfect world if there was no autoimmunity no inflammation your thyroid will very likely always struggle to activate enough. So for you don't beat yourself up if you need a low dose of thyroid hormone because it's literally a true genetic suppression. Right. So that's kind of how I view a lot of these therapies. You want to really Yeah. Tease out. Is it something that you can do lifestyle wise or all these other factors first? Or you could identify right away upfront with the genetic testing. Wow. Okay. I'm gonna work on all my lifestyle to get my testosterone better, but I'm gonna understand that I may not be able to get over a 500 for testosterone. Right? Even doing a lot of the right things. Yeah. Yeah. Obviously, it has some, you know, use cases. I think they, you know, medically use it for, people who have like, children who are, like, stunted in growth like Missy. I think he got growth hormone when he was young. And some some some of those individuals, they actually can have a lot more severe pathogenic or, you know, clinically relevant mutations. Right? So, like, the genes I focus on, they're not, like, gonna completely ruin your life. Right? But some of these other more severe variants. Right? You and I or people listening right now can have mutations for lower growth hormone. But those types of cases, not all of them, but those more clinical cases, they have more severe mutations that are a lot rarer where they really, like, their growth is literally, like, stunted. Right? So it makes sense to utilize that. Yeah. And who's that you said had that? Messi, the soccer soccer player. Yeah. And, you know, the low IGF one and low growth hormone, so these, people with a LaRonde syndrome, they have, like, extremely low rates of cancer and diabetes. So they're, you know, very short in terms of the height, and, they have, yeah, extremely low rates of this cancer. Because IJIFuan, yeah, is gonna, you know, it's involved in cancer growth as well, but, obviously, it's not the only thing it does. Mhmm. But, yeah. Just because these people have extremely low I just want an extremely low growth hormone from birth, then, they, you know, readily died to cancer or diabetes. Yeah. It's interesting. Again, going back to, like, what responds better to the IGF one. Right? Like the cancer cell or the healthy cell. Right? I think we're also got a wonder too. Right? These mutations, these random mutations that cancer cells gain, what if that makes your hypo functioning IGF one receptor hyperfunctioning? Right? So what if you could kind of flip that and now all that hormone is doing that. Right? So Yeah. Interesting rabbit hole. Yeah. Yeah. And, you know, you can use, I guess, nutrient partitioning or in this context, it would be like hormone partitioning that if you lift weights, then, you're more likely to use the IGF-one for muscle growth rather than cancer growth. Because if you eat the standard American diet, you have high IGF-one, you're not exercising, then yeah, you're probably, like, promoting cancer with that lifestyle and that, that, like, form of physical activity. But if you're doing resistance training, then at least you're, you know, building muscle. And interestingly, you know, bodybuilders don't really die to cancer. They die to heart disease a lot. Yeah. But cancer is not that common in that sport. Although they're, you know, abusing Yeah. Because I think a lot of times too, feel like a lot of them can sadly pass, like, what? Like, thirties, forties, early fifties. Right? Right. I wonder if they were able to live long like, I wonder part of that could be a survivorship thing. Right? Where maybe they're just not living long enough for it to really ramp up. Right? Where the heart's kinda giving out earlier. Interesting. Well, I would imagine cancer could, you know, develop much faster. Because in the general population That's true. Yeah. You you don't really see heart disease in people who are 20 or 30 years old. Yeah. You do see cancer in even younger people. So, yeah, it's kinda interesting that bodybuilders I mean, these people are Yeah. They may may again, like like you just mentioned before, maybe that could be due to what are they doing a lot of a lot of intense exercise. Right? So as you mentioned, maybe it could be partitioning interest. Because what you mentioned before was interesting. So the exercise you think could be partitioning that IGF one, is that because the musculoskeletal muscle, it upregulates the IGF one receptors? So it's just kind of there's more of the ligand binding to the muscle cells versus potential cancer cells. Yeah. And, you know, that's how I would think about it that Yeah. You know, mTOR as well. You can use mTOR for muscle growth or cancer growth, but if you are lifting weights, then you're triggering mTOR expression in the muscles mostly. So, you're, I guess, reducing the likelihood of the mTOR being in in or going towards cancer. But you would but, yeah, like, because if you are, let's say, on a standard American diet, you do have high IGF one levels as well, at least in, I would imagine, most cases. But but And is that is that just from the surplus or it's just from the actual the processed foods themselves? You know, probably like all of those things. Yeah. Just eating too much, eating too much processed foods, sugary foods, etcetera. So, yeah, at least that's my theory. Yeah. One thing I would be interested to talk about is sleep. So, some people genetically sleep shorter. I'm not aware if those people have shorter lifespan as well because of that, or, do they live, like, normally? Is it that their body is so resilient that they need less sleep and, they can get away with the sleep? What do you think about that? Yeah. I'm trying to I try to remember off the top of my head. I do know that orexin signaling can play a role in that. So orexin's a really interesting signaling pathway. You know, people think, you know, like adrenaline or dopamine or even histamine, right, can promote wakefulness, but orexin signaling is what really drives that real wakefulness type feeling. So I know mutations that make lower erect and signaling are linked to narcolepsy. Right? So, erect and signaling, I believe has been linked to, I guess those super sleepers. Right? Trying to remember off the top of my head. Yeah. I see what you're saying. Are they literally just they can't sleep as long? Or are they actually protected against, you know, whether it's the oxidative stress or these, you know, negative effects of the sleep itself. Like, are they kind of bundled up in one thing is what you're asking kind of. Right? So I Mhmm. That's a really cool question. Yeah. Are there some people that are super sleepers that aren't as protected against those negative effects? Mhmm. And then there are some people that are super sleepers that are more protected. Right? Then I would guess that they probably can't sleep long, but they feel like crap all the time. But I feel like most of these super sleepers you hear about, they're, like, functioning completely normal just literally on two to four hours of sleep. So I would lean probably towards they're probably mutually inclusive there, having those. Yeah. I can't remember the top of my head which specific genes have been linked to that. I know there's been some kinda like that map kinase, like secondary messengers. Right? But sometimes those can be hard to kinda find a a clear You know, that's exactly why that makes sense because a lot of these secondary messengers can be involved in multiple pathways. Yeah. Yeah. You know, and the perfect combo would be that you have the short sleep genes plus then you maybe have, like, some higher FOXO three that, you, augment yourself against the shorter sleep. You get away with less sleep and just offer less side effects from that. That would be like the if you were to do a gene therapy, then you could you could sell that to, like, CEOs. Well, because that's just interesting too. Right? Like, one of my friends, I don't know if he has a super sleeper gene, but he gets four, maybe five hours, like, and he's totally fine on that consistently. And talking to him about it, he's like, you think it'd be great, but it's great till it's not. Because I literally have four more hours a day every day, and it's like, I don't always just wanna work for those four more hours. So there's, like, a there's a time of day. Usually, later into the night, it's like it could feel kinda lonely, if that makes sense. Right? Because day after day, you have so much more time in your day. Your your effective day is so much longer. Right? But the vast, vast majority of people, especially people living in your time zone, your friends and family. Right? Like, they're not awake with you. Right? So it's kinda interesting to think, like, yeah, CEOs may want that as long as they keep themselves busy during that period of time. Right? Other than I could see it being kind of boring slash, you know Right. Lonesome. Yeah. I mean, the same can apply to just the life extension that if you stay away stay alive for three hundred years, but everyone else dies at 50 or 70, then, yeah. Maybe it gets Well, it reminds me of, I don't know if you're into, like, superheroes and comics, like the old man Logan from Wolverine. Right? He has the super healing factor and, like, going through that. Right? Like, having all these separate wives and families and this and that, and you just kinda know that it's eventually gonna be going away, but you're you're not gonna be going away nearly as quick quickly. Right? Mhmm. Interesting stuff to think about is technology just keeps on advancing. Right? Like, how long would we really want to live? Right? I think it also depends on would we be functional. Right? I think we could both agree if we were like not able to be very mobile and we're very dependent on other people. I really don't think I would want to be adding any more years onto my life. Right? But if we could tack on functional years, like, extend that true health span. Right? Again, I think the limiting factor is how many other people that you love and care about are gonna be on that journey with you. Yeah. Otherwise, you end up either lonely or you have to start from scratch and try to make new friends with people after a hundred plus years of kind of being who you are. Right? That that's wild to think about, honestly. Yeah. Well, you know, there as you as you said earlier, there's so many genes and we don't even know all of them that affect longevity. So, you know, we won't be able to go through all of these genes in this episode. But, you know, let's say as a wrap up, what would be so let's say people are interested in longevity. Obviously, they they do their lifestyle factors right. But what are things that everyone kinda should know about their genes when it comes to longevity? Like, are others, you know, certain genes they would definitely wanna test for? And, how would you, like, approach, you know, constructing you their own lifestyle with the information of their genes? Yeah. I like to look at that not so much as, you know, maybe not to say the exact genes to test for. The way my brain looks at this as a pharmacologist is looking at your genes to figure out which of these longevity supplements are right for you. Right? Kinda as I mentioned, we were talking about, which one we were talking about with the MAO inhibitor. I guess my point is pretty much all these senolytics. Right? Quercetin, resveratrol, like, these all also slow down the breakdown of neurotransmitters. So for some people, they could help with mood. But for a lot of people, especially like the resveratrol quercetin, they block more of the m a o a versus m a o b. I don't care how good the data looks. If I take it and I feel more fearful and anxious and don't sleep as well. Right? Like, I need to find something else to help support that. Right? Or even methylene blue. Methylene blue can be great, but g six p d, that gene can be linked to hemolysis or red blood cell issues and it could flip methylene blue into a pro oxidant. Right? So there's a lot of data around that. That's more so for people getting high doses of IV methylene blue for more clinical treatments. There isn't concrete data yet around the more lower biohacker level doses but people that I've worked with that I've seen have these g six p d mutations. They're not doing mega doses but they don't feel good on methylene blue. It can be that but that also can raise adrenaline in people. Right? We can look at mutations in complex one and three of the mitochondrial electron transport chain complexes and try to figure out those are the two that methylene blue can really help with. So if one and three are genetically more sluggish, right? Methylene blue may make a lot of sense to you for you. But on the flip side if you have slow m a o, or if you have g six p d, methylene blue can make you excessively anxious or possibly have actual health risks for you. So that's how my brain looks at it. You know it's cool to go detective work in trying to find these targetable genetic mutations, but I think more so we have hundreds and thousands of verified nutraceuticals. How do we really know which ones map out for you? Like, I've had so many people come to me. They're on all the senolytics. They're wired. They don't know why. They just have no idea that all these senolytics literally raise adrenaline in your body, but you're not gonna read that on the bottle. You're not gonna read it on the label. And a lot of people selling it may not know that or they might know it and not wanna share that. Right? Because who would wanna get a supplement that can raise adrenaline? Now of course that doesn't mean it's bad for everyone. Some people feel really great. So not finding the the the magical gene, but more so how do we understand our pharmacological tools to make sure the tools match with our genes. Right. That's a, yeah, good perspective. But would someone be would it be worth it for someone to, know the APOE four or something like that? Oh, absolutely. That's the other one that's so tightly, tightly linked to longevity. Right? Like, absolutely. Yeah. I mean, that's it's like there's so many other complications. Right? And it also affects your dietary patterns as well. Right? What you're putting in your body throughout your whole life. It's not just thinking, oh, I'm gonna get Alzheimer's. Right? It's like, why may you have an increased risk for that Alzheimer's and what can we do today? Right? It's not always about the gene therapy or the supplements or the peptides. It's which foods that we're putting into our body as well. That's the whole nutrigenomic side of things as well. Yeah. So like a low hanging fruit to get it checked. Yeah. Well, this was very interesting for me at least and, you know, we didn't cover a lot of the topics we planned initially. We just I decided to, yeah, just pivot into the longevity side of things. So, yeah. We'll, you know, probably have to follow-up, in the future. But, yeah. Where can people learn more about you and your work? Yeah. So, at doctor tyler pansner. Instagram, Facebook, LinkedIn, YouTube, TikTok, www.doctortylerpansner.com. And, yeah. You know, I'm just really on a mission to, a, really try to advance the genetic space and make it more palatable for people. Right. Genetics can be so nebulous for people very overwhelming. And on the flip side really understanding how these supplements work. You know? It's not just this supplement helps with brain health. What else does it do in your body? Right? The supplement space is people love the bash big pharma. Right? Mhmm. But it's like at least pharma is regulated. Supplements aren't regulated. And, you know, it's for me, it's not even so much about is the supplement high quality or are there, like, additives and stuff. Don't get me wrong. That's important. But even the highest quality perfectly pure supplements, if it doesn't line up with your genetics, you're not gonna feel good on that. So try to bring those two together and, yeah. That's exactly what I make content about. And, yeah. Would absolutely love to come on again. It's always love always love talking more about this, deeper science here with you. So I appreciate you having me back. Yeah. I'm happy to have you. And, I'll put the link to the first episode as well in the show notes so people can check out the one, like, specific supplements that we, discussed and the the genetics. Well, yeah. It was great to talk with you, and I'll see you around.