I'll just put it this way. I'm very hopeful for rapamycin. I think if it's used correctly, it will end up showing that it has some pretty profound effects on longevity and potentially on health span. What do you want out of your life? You can't win it a 100% everything. You kinda have to play this balancing act. You can't go extreme one way and and still get the extreme of the other as well. This is, this is tough. This is like this is one of those questions where it's like make or break if a person's gonna continue listening to you or not. Nicholas, welcome to the show. Hey. Welcome. I'm really happy to be here. Yeah. I'm, excited to also have you on the show. You have a great YouTube channel. And, yeah, you you have, like, a lot of very, you know, interesting videos about different new studies and new supplements and just longevity and science in general. So, yeah, like, I find it very useful on myself to kind of browse a lot of the videos that you have. I can say likewise. I mean, I know you've got a ton of content out there dissecting the science on especially longevity in the longevity space. I've I've watched several of your videos. I really like them. Yeah. Like, likewise. But your specialty in a lot of ways is, alsophagy, which is something that was very popular, you know, something like five or four years ago. It still is, but that that was, like, when I made a lot of my own videos back then about that topic and, got, like, a lot of views, and it was, like, this massive kind of buzzword almost, back then. But you're you're an actual, like, researcher of a. So, yeah, how did you, like, get into, researching that specifically? So I got into researching autophagy, in the lab throughout my PhD. So I was doing, so I did, undergrad work in mitochondria, specifically in, like, bioenergetics and metabolism. And then I got into a master's program, and I was still doing mitochondria and bioenergetics. And then when I went for my PhD, the lab that I joined, I brought my bioenergetics experience and brought that to this lab. And this lab was very focused on mitochondria and autophagy, and it's especially a particular type of autophagy called mitophagy, which I'm sure you've discussed before, where, you know, with the, which is just autophagy of mitochondria. It's just a fancy word for that. Right. And, you know, I guess we can start with what is autophagy. Like, there's a lot of different definitions of it out there, and, of course, there's, like, you know, dozens of different types of autophagy out there. But as, like, yeah, like, the umbrella term, what does it, like, actually describe? Yeah. Autophagy is just, so the the word itself indicates what it is. Right? It's auto. So you're basically consuming self, and that's that's essentially what it is. It's just, these this mechanism that we can obviously get into in more details on it. But this mechanism by which your cells are able to take up different proteins and lipids and and organelles and just destroy them and just eliminate them for for a number of different reasons. But that's that's the simplest explanation. Although, like you said, there are many different types of phages, you know, like, xenophagy or autophagy or mitophagy. And there's different versions that ultimately fulfill different functions, but they all kinda operate very similarly. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. I was like reading about that then, yeah, you have, like, virology and, bacteriophage and and, like you said, xenophage and agraphage and yeah. Almost like a phage for every kind of organ in the body. Yeah. Yeah. Definitely. Exactly. But, how does it, like, you know, relate to longevity? I know, like, one of the main, let's say, selling points or, like, the ideas behind the tava tube is that it's important for longevity to remove these, you know, dead cell parts that accumulate during engaging? Yeah. So there's you could just that one question, which is a really good question. That one question could probably be filled up with, like, an hour's worth of content just because the the sheer complexity of what happens. So, but I'll I'll give you just, like, one brief, way that autophagy strongly contributes to not just lifespan, but health span as well. So one thing that happens with aging, especially, let's say, around mitochondria, is that you can experience what's known as proteotoxicity, where you get this accumulation of dysfunctional proteins or mistargeted proteins. What what do I mean by mistargeted proteins is your cell will produce proteins, and they actually have tags on them that tell or kind of biochemically tell the cell where to place them. So they should be in different compartments of the cell so that they can fulfill their particular function. So think of, like, you wouldn't want a, a lifeguard at, I don't know, in in a sauna, or you wouldn't want a a lifeguard as a police officer. You need to put these different functional proteins, these different roles in their specific area. So there can be mistargeting of proteins, which happens with aging as our DNA structure gets damaged and what whatnot that ultimately leads to, these proteins that may be functional, but their targeting is mislabeled to the point where they end up going to, the wrong areas within the cell. So they can accumulate, which is called proteotoxicity, around these organelles like mitochondria, which ultimately then leads to autophagy to come in and eliminate either the mitochondrion or eliminate these aggregates of proteins that are just kinda stuck within the cell. And once you've eliminated those, then you've cleared up space and allowed the cell to potentially produce the correct protein and target it to the to the correct spot. And that's just one example. I mean, there are many, many others. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. Like, with age, like, you know, there's things go wrong in a lot of ways with aging and, you know, you're even even, like, when you're not, like, particularly old, if you're, like, in a disease state or, you know, some inflammatory condition, you're gonna have more, you know, dysfunctional cell parts and kinda junk material around that just can accumulate. Yeah. Mhmm. I think it was in, like, 2021 when they actually recognized this, disabled autophagy as one of the new hallmarks of aging, like, some some year around there. Yeah. You're exactly right. So, and there's so much complexity that comes around autophagy, but, the disabling of autophagy can happen through a number of different ways. One of the more common ones, and that actually happens in Alzheimer's as well or some of the models of Alzheimer's, is that in the terminal stages, so the late stages of autophagy, you have this, this phagosome, this vesicle that's formed that is very capable of, you know, encapsulating and capturing different components of the cell and degrading them and destroying them. But the way that it degrades it and destroys these proteins is by fusing with another vesicle called the lysosome. And that lysosome contains enzymes within it that destroy anything that's found inside this other vesicle once they've merged. And the pH is also extremely acidic, so it essentially destroys, again, another mechanism by which it gets destroyed. And when you have dysfunctional autophagy, or one example of dysfunctional autophagy is the lysosomes can have an increase in pH, which ultimately leads them not to be acidic anymore. So even if they were to to to fuse with this phagosome, this autophagosome, then you don't get the destruction of the protein. So it's kinda like gets stuck in this this, this mechanism where you have the fusion. Everything should be working normally, but it just simply doesn't destroy those proteins. And like I said, that's just one example of dysfunction that can occur. This episode is brought to you by Bone Charge, my favorite company for blue blocking glasses, red light therapy devices, and red light light bulbs. These items are essential for keeping your sleep wakefulness cycles aligned in a world that tries to mess them up. Instead of looking at your phone before bed and letting the blue light disrupt your melatonin production, why not wear blue blockers instead that prevent that from happening? Instead of having your bedroom lit up with bright lights, use the more sleep friendly alternative by opting for flicker free red light light bulbs that don't disrupt your sleep. Boncharge also has amazing infrared sauna blankets that can give you the same health benefits as the traditional sauna. You also get the unique benefits of infrared light that improves joint and skin health. Head over to boncharge.com/seamlund and use the code seam, s I I m, for a 15% discount. I remember reading about it as well several years ago that the, I guess, the origin of autophagy or where does it come from is itself is also kind of a mystery that we don't know where it kind of forms or or, like, where does it come from. It just kind of appears and then dissolves, those, cell parts. Like, there's there's no, like, I guess, you know, there's always the depiction that it's like Pac Man inside your cells, but there's no, like, Pac Man inside your cells that is actually doing it. So, like, the autophagy is just a process. It's not like an actual entity or a it's not a cell inside or it's not like a cell particle itself. You can't, like, you know, pinpoint this is autophagy. It's like it forms and then it does its work And it's kind of, I don't know, like some collective consciousness of the cell. Yeah. Yeah. But I think that's probably true for almost anything inside the cell. It's not like cells sit there and think about, like, oh, now we need to to deal with certain components, within ourselves. Autophagy is triggered by in a number of different molecules that ultimately lead to, an organelle called the endoplasmic reticulum to start pinching off these sections, these blobs that come off of it, these big sacs, which are called phagosomes. And then those mature into what I was describing earlier with the eventual forming with the lysosome to create, the autolysosome, which is the ultimate form of autophagy, which ultimately then destroys all these different, components like we've been like we've been describing. And what does it you know, what's the outcome of that? So, like, it dissolves those things. Does it use that for energy, or does it use it to, do some other processes? Or what does it like, that happens to the the actual trash? Yeah. That's a good question. So, a a number of different mechanisms that can come from autophagy. So autophagy will come in. You have all these functional proteins or an organelle, which is made up of lipids and and carbohydrates and and, and proteins and will destroy it into its its component parts. So that can be like single amino acids, which then can be recycled, and they often are, but not completely. Not everything is a is perfect in a biological process. So then you can get some loss of those amino acids, or you can get, the destruction of different lipids to to make them into smaller lipids, like fat molecules. Carbohydrates can be broken down and potentially be recycled for, let's say, glycogen synthesis. Or, you know, there's there's any number of different mechanisms by which all these different components. So some of them can be rebuilt, and some of them just get excreted or released or oxidized in some way. Gotcha. You mentioned, like, there's different molecules that trigger autophagy, and this is also, like, a very contentious topic or a very conflicting opinions about it online. You know, there's this saying that, okay. You need to fast seven days or something to even activate autophagy, and you can't even have coffee in your fastest state. And, and, yeah, like, just anything that has calories is immediately gonna break autophagy. And, yeah, what do you think about that? Yeah. So that's that's definitely, I'm sure you've seen this all the time on social media with the the big headlines of, activate autophagy or you're like you said, perfectly stated, like, if you don't fast for exactly this amount of time, autophagy is not happening whatsoever. And that's that's, it's not at all what happens within the cells. The way I explain it is really simply just think of autophagy like a dimmer switch, just like a lot of processes that are happening within your cells. So you can either dim autophagy where autophagy is not as active, and you you've got kind of the opposite happening, let's say building and and growth and whatnot. Or you can increase autophagy, so you're you're increasing the light of autophagy, and then the other systems are probably not gonna be as active. So it's it's really just this ebb and flow. But there are things that you can do. Like you mentioned fasting, for example, is definitely one of the ways that you can severely increase, autophagy. One question I get asked is, like, how long should a person fast to see these increases in autophagy? And the answer is we don't actually know. There's no research other than animal research, which is just it's really difficult to translate that because, you know, a mouse's lifespan, especially in within the the count the, what's the word I'm looking containing within, like, a day is not reproducible for humans. Like, we can't say, oh, well, a mouse fasted for eighteen hours, so therefore, we should look at intermittent fasting and say, oh, that should apply to to humans as well. There was one study looking at intermittent fasting recently, and they looked at, some markers. I say, quote, unquote, markers of autophagy. And, really, they did not look at markers of autophagy. It was reported as if it was, markers of autophagy, but the the actual molecules, the genes that they looked at were kinda upstream of autophagy. So they could have actually acted on any number of other mechanisms. It's just people were attributing it attributing it to, autophagy. So up to this point, from a fasting perspective, we just don't have good, human evidence yet. Right. Yeah. So, like, fasting does increase with average a year, but, you know, how long is the opt what is the optimal fasting window is obviously, depends a lot on other things as well then. Yeah. Definitely. Yeah. What about, like, you know, exercise and certain, like, the dietary components? Yeah. So exercise is one we do have better evidence for. We actually do have several human studies that have looked at exercise and autophagy. And while, you know, some researchers might debate on the quality of some of that evidence, the overall trend of the evidence in human trials is that exercise does potently increase autophagy. So it has probably the greatest again, we we don't know the fasting data, so we can't really, you know, do a a side by side comparison. But I can definitely say exercise definitely in the top three of of massive ways to, dramatically improve autophagy. And I would say also that that probably applies more than just to, like, skeletal muscle. It probably applies across the the entire physiology. So, in that way, exercise is just this really, potent trigger. The the types of exercise that they've looked at, that they focused on is more endurance style as well as high intensity interval training. So they haven't focused nearly as much on, like, resistance training. And I think there's a lot of research that needs to be done to really tease out those details. But as it stands, the current evidence indicates that exercise is definitely a great way to go. Mhmm. Yeah. If I recall correctly, then there was one of those studies that something like thirty minutes of, high intensity aerobic exercise was able to, like, activate quite a lot. So, yeah, like, you don't need to, yeah, like, necessarily fast for her. So several days where whereas if you just you can exercise. Yeah. Exactly. Mhmm. But, I've also seen, you know, that these dietary polyphenols and coffee and teas, they also, at least in, like, cell studies, increase the topogen. Yeah. That's true. So, polyphenols, I know coffee has been shown to increase autophagy. I don't I know there have been animal studies on it. I've maybe in humans here, kind of stretching my memory there because I did briefly look at that literature, but I I don't remember exactly. The other thing that I will say is that anything I'm sure you've discussed this protein before, because of the style of content that you produce, but, like, the the protein AMPK, which is this, you know, sensor of the metabolic state of the cell. And anytime you have AMPK that's activated, and the way that it's activated is by increases in ADP levels. So our cells for anybody listening, our cells are primarily function on ATP. So ATP then gets turned into ADP, and then ADP gets con turn converted into AMP. And this AMPK is highly sensitive is a little bit sensitive to ADP, but highly, highly sensitive to AMP. So if AMP levels rise and bind to AMPK, you get this mass activation of AMPK, which is probably the greatest trigger of autophagy. It does many, many other things as I'm sure you've discussed before as well. It does many things. But one of the chief things that it does is activate, autophagy. So the reason why I'm mentioning that is because a lot of these different compounds, like polyphenols or or caloric restriction, have huge effects on AMPK activation through, either the the increase in AMP or some of the other, ways that AMPK can be activated. So, yeah, like, these physiological stressors, like exercise and and even, like, caffeine and, green tea and those things, they can activate AMPK, which then also increases autophagy. Yep. Exactly. You mentioned AMPK. So, you know, the counterpart of that is, mTOR, so this, growth path growth switch in the body. And that's all almost, yeah, like, depicted as the kind of boogeyman in, in longevity as well. And it, you know, directly suppresses autologie, which is one of the reasons why they might think that it's linked to, or is associated with, accelerated aging or reduced lifespan in animal studies. So, yeah. You know? And this ties into also, like, protein that if you eat protein, you increase mTOR, you suppress pathology, and you're accelerating in aging. What what do you think about that? I think it makes a lot of sense. I I sometimes hesitate because mTOR is another one of those proteins that's so powerful. It has tremendous effects on all kinds of different processes within the cells, not to mention we have different isoforms, mTOR one, mTOR two, or at least the complexes. And so for me, when I think about mTOR, I do think that that is one of the major pathways that it inhibits, this autophagy pathway. That makes complete sense to me. However, I wouldn't be surprised if there were other ways that mTOR like, for example, mTOR activates, some inflammatory pathways. It increases the amount of protein that's produced. And if we go back to this proteotoxicity example, then it's possible that mTOR may exacerbate the issue. There have been situations where with certain chronic diseases, you see this upregulation of mTOR that's just chronically elevated. And I think that's one of the ideas behind rapamycin, if I remember correctly, that it at least brings that back down to closer to a a healthy baseline. You don't wanna absolutely eliminate mTOR because then, well, you die. But, just bringing that down a little bit. So there's a lot of different ways that we can that we can think about mTOR and its effects on longevity. But I I do think autophagy is definitely one of the major ones. Yeah. Do you think, like, people should follow, like, a lower protein diet, or what do you think about that? Well, that's tricky, because for me so one thing that I've been trying to define I'd actually be really interested in your perspective on this because one thing that I try to define is the difference between longevity and health span. Mhmm. So they they're they're closely related, but they're not exactly the same. As in there are certain things, and I haven't fully cleared up my thoughts on this, but I there are certain things that I think increase longevity that help health span up to a point, and then they start becoming detrimental. And one of those is protein consumption. So protein consumption, if you drop protein consumption down to, like, a minimum viable amount, you can potentially increase lifespan, but you may be dramatically, affecting your health span in a negative way in that you might may not be able to maintain muscular, musculature, your your bone mass, all these different aspects of of health. So it's kind of a trade off between the two. So I don't know. I mean, have have you have you thought about this kind of, that that kinda interplay between the two before? Yeah. Like, there is, yeah, definitely some tension between, you know, having big muscles and having very good health span and maximum lifespan. So, yeah, like, muscle mass is associated with reduced mortality, especially in elderly people, but it doesn't mean that having, like, you know, bodybuilder sized muscles would make you live longer. That's, you know, that's probably not gonna happen. Like, most bodybuilders don't live, like, very long, besides, you know, the steroids. But, Yeah. I think there is some, like, yeah, overlap between health span and, lifespan. So if you have, like, very low health span, then you're limiting your maximum lifespan. But, in order to read, like, reach, like, maximum lifespan, then you probably won't be able to, like or, like, you probably need to, like, maybe something like 90% of your health span, kind of up optimized. So there's probably some balance, between those things. But with regards to protein, then, yeah, like, you know, there's a risk that if you are on a very low protein diet, you, you know, probably have, like, less muscle mass, and you increase your risk of hip fractures and frailty when you're older especially. But if you're eating, yeah, like, super amounts of protein like a bodybuilder, then, you know, that probably will shorten your lifespan as well in in different mechanisms. I think, yeah, something like a more moderate amount of protein is more appropriate. And if you look at the research, then, you know, something like 1.6 grams per kilogram or 0.8 grams per pound is kind of the sweet spot for maximum muscle growth, at least based on the studies, that you won't be even seeing more muscle growth even if you eat more protein than that either. So I think I I like to kinda stick somewhere between, yeah, around there to 0.7, 0.8 grams per pound of body weight. Yeah. And there's there's even some debate on, like, the optimal amount of protein for, muscle growth, which I know I I don't know if you've ever, had Menno Henselman on the I have. Yeah. Podcast before. Yeah. I'm sure he I mean, he's he's more well versed than I am on the topic. But then you have people like Greg Nuckols and, and, Eric Helms and whatnot. So you have these, like, different debates. But the idea is, like, within this general range, it's not like anybody is gonna be, like, you know, fivefold one way or fivefold another way. So, yeah, I I completely agree with you. I think that I I think one thing that people need to consider is, like, what do you want out of your life? You you can't win it a 100% everything. You kinda have to play this balancing act. You can kinda tilt one way or you can kinda tilt another way without impeding the other one too much. But you can't go extreme one way and and still get the extreme of the other as well. So Yeah. That's, it's just something to keep in mind. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. Like, being a pro athlete, you know, generally, athletes do live a little bit longer than the general population. But if you're, like, a pro athlete and, you know, especially, like, ultra endurance athlete or something, then you're probably not gonna live the most maximum lifespan for your genetic potential. So you're kind of losing a few years because of the excessive amounts of, exercise that you might do. But yeah. So, like, you know, obviously, moderate amounts and, you know, slightly more than moderate, I think, is generally healthy for your lifespan and health span. Yeah. Completely agree. Yeah. It's well stated. Yeah. And I think, you know, one thing one problem with these kind of these, more vague concepts is that, you know, you can't measure or, like, we don't have a good way to measure autophagy and good measure way to measure mTOR either. So if we could measure and we know what is the optimal amount of this expression of these, pathways, then we would actually maybe have some answers. But, you know, we don't even know exactly how much is too much or how much is too little. You know? We only have certain, like, biomarkers, you know, muscle mass, bone density, and and certain blood markers. You know, IG of one is kinda useful for assessing protein synthesis and, relative risk and cancer risk that you might experience if you have, like, very high mTOR expression. So there are a few hands handset of, like, markers that you can look at, and they have, like, a lot more more, like, studies to kinda back up as well. Like, we know that, you know, if you're below this threshold for muscle mass and muscle strength, then, you know, your risk of frailty and dying is much higher and vice versa. If you're a very high I g o one levels, then, you know, that's generally associated with higher risk of cancer and heart disease and other other problems. Yeah. Exactly. Mhmm. Are there any, like, supplements that can potentially also, like, help with autophagy? Supplements is always a tricky one for me. I'm, like, looking specifically at supplements to induce autophagy. I think of, like, kinda calorie restrictive mimetic supplements, but none of them that none of them really jump off the board for me. Again, mainly because there just haven't been that many studies that have looked at autophagy markers. I mean, you say you stated it really well that looking at these autophagy markers, it's not an easy thing to do, especially when you're trying to say that okay. Let's say you were to measure, like, skeletal muscle mass. That doesn't necessarily mean that you're gonna see increases in autophagy in, like, the liver or the brain or whatnot. So when we do look at these autophagy studies, and there are a lot of them, and some of them have looked at different supplements and whatnot, you I don't actually know about glycine, but glycine just kinda fits within this kinda general idea of, autophagy because of the the mechanism of action that it works through. But you you have these studies that are in animal studies typically because you need to do a lot of these invasive, surgeries and whatnot. So you need to take, like, brain tissue. You may need to take liver, pancreas, and heart tissue, and all that stuff, which most people aren't all that amenable to to giving up all their organs, for for science, especially, you know, at the ripe old age of, like, 33 or something. So so that's why it's it's a little difficult to to really talk about any particular supplement, in translation for autophagy. It's not to say that there aren't beneficial supplements, just to be clear. There are, plenty. But translating that in relation to autophagy that's so hard to to measure is difficult to say. So I'll just speculate, and I'll say glycine might be one of those simply because, again, like I said, the mechanism of action, it does have an impact on this whole, like, mTOR activation, AMPK activation. So that would be, that would be one guess. Potentially, GLINAC, so in relation to glycine, the addition of n acetylcysteine, to make that that GLINAC combination because it has such a potent effect on glutathione, which ultimately then does have an impact on, again, AMPK and all that. So I would say I would say those two, but I'd probably have to look in the literature a little bit more. Yeah. Some of these, like, AMPK activators like berberine probably might have also something like metformin, I think, does it as well, rapamycin then. Oh, rapamycin. Rapamycin for sure is gonna be a potent one. Metformin probably as well because metformin I think the tricky thing with metformin is that the mechanism of action that it works through, it's got two different mechanisms of action or primary ones. And one of them is directly on mitochondria, which ultimately affects the ATP levels within the cell. And that can have a potent effect on AMPK, and that's one of the the mechanisms. So but the the problem with that is that from my understanding is the the concentrations of metformin to actually achieve that mechanism of action are much higher than what we actually consume. So I'm I'm a little, like, I'm not I guess I'll I'll just say I'm not sure about that one even though the mechanism is definitely there for it to to stimulate AMPK. Right. Do you think so there's, like, some of these data that metformin users might even live longer than nondiabetics, not taking metformin. So what do you think about that kind of studies that does Metformin have any lifespan in humans? Yeah. That was a that was a that was a fascinating series of experiments or or studies that came out. So there was this I don't remember the exact year. You might you might remember it better than I do, but there was this one study that came out that looked at the comparison. So of non diabetics not on metformin versus diabetics on met formin and showed that metformin improved mortality risk over the people that were healthy. You know, quote unquote. The the definition of healthy was non diabetic. Yeah. So that was like that that sent ripples across the the longevity space. But the problem is that that data was reanalyzed and redone by another group, and they showed, well, you guys made a critical mistake because the way you defined the experimental parameters was that you looked at metformin as a monotherapy, which it can be used as a monotherapy. But once people progress to later stages of diabetes, they start adding more of these different antidiabetic drugs, which means that they were then excluded from the analysis. So if people are getting, sicker and sicker Mhmm. I mean, the where do you think that happens to mortality? Like, the the mortality statistics? It massively skews the mortality statistics in favor of the people that are diabetic, but still are only on a metformin, just using, metformin. So once that was reanalyzed, they showed that, no. It's not the case if you don't have diabetes and you're not taking metformin. You still, are way better off than if you have diabetes and are taking metformin. But just to just to be clear here, that does not mean that metformin wasn't effective. It was very effective. It still improved mortality compared to people who don't take metformin. And in defense of metformin, I don't know if you saw this, but there's a recent, paper that I need to cover. I'm just, like, so backlogged. And maybe you've covered it already, but this study looking at metformin in, monkeys and the the tremendous effects that metformin has, I think it just released, like, a month or two months, maybe a few months ago, showing that metformin has these tremendous effects across a bunch of different physiological states, and that's in monkeys. So I think that's that's more encouraging, than than some of the, associate of data that we've looked at. Yeah. Metformin is, like, very interesting. And, yeah, like, at the moment, I wouldn't start taking metformin as a healthy person, at least based on the data, right now. But if you have, yeah, diabetes or even some metabolic syndrome or some, like, metabolic disorders, then, yeah, it can be quite quite lifesaving in that sense. With with regards to, like, lifespan and I lifespan, then I think the the, the National Institute Aging, the ITP study, they didn't find any life extension from metformin when they did it on their, like, mouse studies. But, there was, like, another one, a Carbose, which is also like a diabetes drug that one did extend the lifespan. So, have you looked at the Carbose as well? A little bit. So I just wanna caveat this that I haven't looked done, like, a deep dive into a Carbose, but the mechanism of action by a Carbose, and please correct me if I'm wrong on this, that it blocks the absorption of carbohydrates or something along those lines? Yeah. Yeah. That's something that they do. Yeah. So something in that that realm. So to me, I wonder if what's actually happening is potentially people are just not absorbing as many calorically rich, nutrients or maybe not getting, you know, glucose spikes or whatever. However you wanted to to describe it, but you're you're talking about mechanisms that are pre it entering the cells, which I think would have more widespread effects to the physiology. So it doesn't exactly shock me. And the carbos, from what I remember in the ITP, was pretty pretty sound. Like, it had a pretty, good effect size. So, definitely encouraging. Yeah, the ITP studies are are are a fantastic start to to look at some of these, these nutrients for sure. I think, what, astaxanthin is in there and a few others as well. Yeah. I think it's, glycine, astaxanthin, a few of, like, some patented herbal supplements, which was kinda surprising. Mhmm. But, yeah, at Carbose and Repomycin, obviously, is one one of the most notorious one from there. Yeah. What do you think about Repomycin? Oh, that one's, I so I'll be really curious on your thoughts on this. So I'm gonna throw the question back to you after I I answer this because, so I've looked at a lot of literature on rapamycin, and it's true that ITP data was really fantastic. I looked at, a lot of the human trials looking at rapamycin. And although there was that one recent trial, I think it was called the pearl trial, that was a little bit disappointing, there there were some very good explanations for why it was disappointing. Ultimately, I'm I'm pretty hopeful. I'll just put it this way. I'm very hopeful for rapamycin. I think if it's used correctly, it will end up showing that it has some pretty profound effects on longevity and potentially on health span, especially in people that have chronic elevations of, like, mTOR, activity, so older individuals. I think that rapamycin will probably end up showing a a pretty robust effect. But what what do you think? Like, what where are you where do you land on rapamycin? Yeah. I I do also agree that rapamycin is very, like, promising and interesting. Like, I think it has the biggest potential of actually moving the needle on human lifespan beyond, like, what is possible for our genetics. But, yeah, you know, unfortunately, there's no, like, actual human studies. I definitely would like to see the Matt Caber Lane's dog aging project to go into fruition. Like, you know, if there was a results come out and they're, like, like, positive and they show some, life extension in the dogs, then, you know, I would start giving my dog rapamycin, and I would probably start microdosing myself as well at at some point. But right now, we're like you know, I'm at a at a age where it doesn't make sense yet. You know, if I was something like 60 or 70, 80 years old, then I would take all the metformin and rapamycin just in case because, you know, you have or you're already at, like, a pretty old age. But I'm I'm 30 right now, so it's I still have, you know, at least thirty, forty years of, time for these new technologies or new findings to, come out. Well, if if your pace of aging, information continues to be true, I think you've got longer than thirty or forty years. Yeah. Well, I mean, those those, pace of aging tests, you know, they kind of I've I've started to become more skeptical about them over time because of I've seen that they vary quite a lot based on what you do. Like, when I was doing the first test, it was, like, very good result, but I wasn't doing anything particularly, you know, impressive for my routine. When I did this following tests, I actually dialed down my routine a lot, but I I but I just got COVID before doing the test, like, two months ago or two months before taking the second test, then it kind of skyrocketed my result a little bit to, you know, 0.69. But I didn't do anything else. It was just, like, this COVID aftermath for the next, like, three, four months, that increased that pace of aging test. But, yeah. What have you ever looked at, like, those studies of these tests? I've and so I've looked at a few studies that have used the the pace of aging tests. Like, there's a recent one of with vitamin d and omega three. I don't know if you run across that one. It just came out maybe a few weeks ago. And that one I mean, it's interesting. So the pace of aging tests are really interesting. I definitely wouldn't use this as, like, a sole metric of, oh, yeah. I'm I'm definitely not aging, quickly or I'm aging more slowly or whatever it might be. But, they they're definitely a tool, and I think they're a powerful tool. They're a super fun tool. They're an interesting tool. But I would wanna look at other metrics as well just to make sure that but, you know, once you hit those, like, the the blood tests, functional tests, like, if you're strong within the top, let's say, 5% or 10%, your blood values are all within normal ranges, and you've got great, you know, pace of aging tests, like, all the indication is pointing to you're doing a really fantastic job. You know? Yeah. Yeah. I guess the challenge is that if you get a result, you necessarily don't know what to do with it regardless of what the result is. So let's say you get a bad result. Okay. It means I'm gonna have to, you know, clean up my diet, sleep a bit more, exercise more regularly, maybe take a few supplements and manage stress. But that's the same thing you would do if you get a very good score. So if you get, like, the best score in the world, are you gonna change your routine somehow, or it's gonna be with the same routine that you would did, if you got, like, a very bad score? So it doesn't really change the practical, you know, the habits that you would actually start doing, which is the exercise, sleep, and, diet and a few supplements. Yeah. I think, I think that's where it comes down to the individual just deciding, like, what's a good enough score where I'm satisfied? Like, I don't I don't wanna just keep killing myself trying to get, you know, incrementally shaving off as much as possible. I mean, Brian Johnson, of course, spends $2,000,000. So he most people aren't gonna be able to spend $2,000,000 on on trying to shave off every last, last bit. So if you're doing exactly to your point, the sleep, the exercise, nutrition, a little bit of supplementation, and you're getting, you know, within the top 2%, I mean, for me, this is just me personally. I would be like, alright. I'm done. I'm I'm sticking to this, and I'll I'll I'm I'm not gonna do too much more. Mhmm. Yeah. This is actually interesting because Brian Johnson stopped taking rapamycin Mhmm. Based on this, like, recent analysis where rapamycin use was seen to increase the biological age scores, which I think was kind of silly because are you optimizing for the pace of aging, this kind of hypothetical number, or are you optimizing for maximum lifespan? Because there's, you know, ton of data that rapamycin extends maximum lifespan or, like, extends lifespan in animals, but this hypothetical number of pace of aging is such a novel metric that, you know, which which is the priorities. Like, this vanity metric, or is it the actual lifespan that takes decades to actually see if it works? But based on the animal studies that it would work. Like, I would personally would have I wouldn't have stopped taking rapamycin based on this analysis myself. Yeah. And I think a lot of that stuff comes down to context too, like the amount of rapamycin you're taking, the type of rapamycin as in is it compounded? Is it generic? Are you taking it, multiple times a week? So some studies use, like, a two times a week. Some studies do every single day at a very microdose level. Are you taking it once a week? Are you taking it every two weeks? Like, the the the the dosage itself, like, there's so many different variables that you can play around with to to make sure that you might not get some of the smaller, side effects of frapamycin like cold sores. And I I I haven't actually I I remember learning about that study. I just haven't taken the time to actually read it yet. But, you know, it's that those kinds of contexts that allow you to to say, okay. Well, they're they're learning that there's this increase in pace of aging with, with, rapamycin. Let me look at the parameters that they used and see how that is represented by some of the other studies that have shown positive effects of rapamycin and see where there might be some difference there that might explain the difference in in these results. And that's where getting into those nuances is is really interesting, but also, might offer some some answers instead of, like, Brian Johnson just cutting it out. I I I think he also had a few side effects, if I remember, like the the cold source and stuff like that. But, again, I would imagine that his team of doctors would be like, okay. Let's start looking at those contexts, and let's start playing around with the formulation to see, if maybe we can just drop it or extend the time that you you before you take your next dose and stuff like that. But, yeah, whatever. I I I agree with your point. Yeah. And, you know, it's it will be interesting. I haven't read specifically of, okay, which studies did I looked at in in that rapamycin context? Because I would imagine that those studies are done on people, you know, who would regularly get rapamycin, which are, like, organ transplant patients or something like that, which is completely different population than, like, a generally healthy or or like a Brian Johnson type of person. So, if their biological age scores increased from rapamycin, then it could be also because of the illness that they had, not necessarily rapamycin. So, yeah, like, I wouldn't, yeah, kind of jump to conclusions based on that. I agree completely. Now are there any other supplements out there for general longevity and health that you're, like, particularly interested in or what you're seeing studies that are, like, all really promising? Yeah. Two two of the supplements. One, I'm sure you've discussed, a lot is creatine. That one is, is a supplement that I think I don't I don't wanna say that has any effect on, lifespan, but it has tremendous effects, I think, as a as a single supplement on health span. So, obviously, it improves performance, muscular performance. It improves overall metabolism, but it also improves, brain health as well or brain function from from the data that I've seen. And my impression is that we're probably gonna continue to see where creatine has these different positive effects. There's some effects on the immune system as well, positive effects. There's also some data showing negative effects just to be clear. But when you, again, when you when you read the the totality of the data and you contextualize it, like, oh, okay. I mean, if a person has maybe a very specific type of cancer, creatine may be contraindicated. But for ninety nine point nine percent of people, creatine seems to be largely a benefit. There's certainly certain, situations where it might not. But yeah. So that supplement is is is always my number one, or at least up to this point. The second one oh, actually, speaking of creatine, there's a recent study that just came out maybe maybe a month ago. We'll just say a month ago, looking at creatine and the association with cancer. Mhmm. And they showed a reduction in cancer risk with greater creatine consumption. To be clear, some some nuances to that, they were looking at, meat consumption. They were not looking at actual creatine supplementation. And there are some some small problems that I have with that analysis. But just in general, just throwing it out there, just saying that, there is at least that association of of an inverse association of if creatine goes up, that there's this decrease in in cancer risk. Anyway, so that's one of them. And then the other one that I'm pretty bullish on depending on dosage is the, omega threes. Omega threes for the brain, omega threes for the heart. You know, again, those those, supplements and it's not like you have to supplement. You can also consume it just from from your diet if you want. That's another way to go. Yeah. Omega threes and creatine, I think they are the one of the most researched, in human in human's research, supplements out there, and, yeah, definitely a lot of positive, like, science from there. But, yeah, but they're not gonna probably, like, extend your maximum lifespan like, like something more, intensive would. And, you know, even with rapamycin, you know, it's probably not gonna make a live to, like, a hundred fifty, two hundred years, something like that. Yeah. Yeah. What actually, what do you think are the the main factors that hold people back from extending their lifespan? Like, as a whole, humanity extending their lifespan beyond, let's say, one twenty or one ten. Yeah. I mean, I guess there could be, like, two answers to it. You know, if you wanna talk about breaking the kind of hypothetical ceiling of a 120 so that people live to a 130, 40, then for that, if you're, like, theoretically, yeah, like, slow down biological aging, you know, as a concept, it, you know, could be real. You know, some people age faster in many different ways physically, mentally, aesthetically, whatever it is. So there is in, like, a theoretical biological age that we all have. And if you, yeah, like, slow it down with certain interventions, certain pharmaceuticals or therapies, then, you know, theoretically, your your body will wear out much slower. So you'll just by just by you're slowing down time, essentially, and you live, you know, decades a few decades longer. But it's probably not going to, you know, lead to quote, quote, unquote immortality that you're gonna live hundreds of years. But for that, we probably need to do something more along the lines of genetic, like, engineering or gen genetic thing or something like that, because, you know, entropy is kind of always fighting against you, and you can't, you know, escape it completely unless you're doing something that we don't know what to do at the moment. So, yeah, like, that's a very, you know, hypothetic that that's very, like, a sci fi scenario that we don't even know where to look look at it right now. Like, there's very interesting, like, ideas, but, for me, they've always stayed very, like, theoretical. There's never been, like, very practical steps of, okay. This is what we actually need need to do to make us live to a 100 and thirty, forty, fifty, years. Yeah. I I couldn't have said it better myself. I completely agree. Yeah. Taurine is, like, another one very popular supplement out there that, you know, people are always asking about from me. Yeah. Taurine's, another one that so taurine has some performance benefits. Taurine has some cardiovascular benefits. The effects are pretty mild, but just because on a clinical scale, we don't see, like, huge effects doesn't mean that in other metrics that we could look at, that taurine wouldn't have some some real benefit. And the science paper that released, what, two years ago, a year and a half ago at this point, that looked at a a bunch of different animal models, but also tried to relate that to humans as much as they could, showed when they looked at some of these nonclinical metrics, I'm talking like stem cells or looking at, DNA damage, like, stuff that you wouldn't necessarily get on a blood test. They did show that taurine had some pretty tremendous effects. So I think all that grouped together, with some of the data, at least that I've looked at in, like, metabolic syndrome or, looking at some of the performance, and that's why it's added to a bunch of, of energy drinks and whatnot. I'm not saying that energy drinks are good for you or anything, but although that is something people bring up all the time. Well, thank goodness I'm taking an energy drink. That's not the point. The point being that the the reason why they put that molecule in there is because there is pretty good evidence indicating that it it does provide a a performance benefit. So I like taurine. It's it's definitely higher up on on my list of supplements, but, I would like to see more data just overall. Yeah. Well, caffeine is also, like, theoretically theoretically an AMPK activator, so you're also getting a soft from Red Bulls. So why not? Yeah. Well, we'll we'll just forget about the sugar aspect of this. Yeah. Well, you need the sugar free versions. Mhmm. We're gonna be shift gears a bit to diet. So that's a very controversial topic. Yeah. From dietary perspective, we mentioned, like, you know, protein, and certain, like, this dietary polyphenols that also help with autophagy and generally that are associated with better health outcomes. So what is your, like, opinions on diet? Like, if there was any, like, general guidelines or, you know, principles of diet to follow? Yeah. Well, this is, this is tough. This is, like, this is one of those questions where it's, like, make or break if a person's gonna continue listening to you or not. Yeah. It's fifty fifty. Yeah. It doesn't matter what you say. You piss everything off. It does yeah. Exactly. It does not matter what you say. Somebody's gonna be like, well, he was just completely full of it. And then another group of people are gonna be like, that was great. Yeah. So so my perspective is you can you can look at diet based on, like, a few basic principles, and then you can start getting into some of the minutiae of, like, the the different details and whatnot. The number one thing that I look at is are you gaining weight on your diet? That, to me, that that makes the probably the biggest difference on your health. If your weight is going upwards or it's if it's going down beyond, like, a certain point where you start getting unhealthy, then your diet is a poor diet. It's it's leading to serious, consequences, metabolic consequences, disease consequences, all kinds of different consequences. So that's that's number one. Then from there, again, this is a question that people have to ask themselves. What about protein? Like, do do I want to prioritize health span and maybe kind of push my my lifespan beyond the average? Or do I really wanna push lifespan and kinda be miserable? Mhmm. Because those are kind of the two choices that I'm I'm that's where I'm currently kind of circulating around. And I think that, because of so many positive effects of protein, like on satiety, making sure that people don't overconsume, which is ultimately what the number one principle would indicate, I'd say that the protein target that you mentioned, kind of like that middle of the road, which is kinda supplementing enough so that a person can build muscle, maintain muscle, but not where they're just constantly consuming protein, especially at the expense of other nutrients. I think that a middle of the road protein level is is perfectly fine. So, like, I would say zero I think it's anywhere between, like, 0.72 grams per pound up to one gram per pound, which I think is, like, what, 1.6 grams per kilogram or 1.8 kilogram grams per kilogram. Yeah. So that's that's one way I would go. And then from there from there, you start getting into some really so okay. We'll let's talk about dietary fat. So then dietary fat is is another aspect that you have to have. You have to have a certain amount of dietary fat. It's not a whole lot, but you need a certain amount. And I the literature that I've looked at, the vast majority of it points to unsaturated fats being more beneficial and less detrimental as a whole than saturated fats. Now I've already lost a few people. So you then you can get into some more of the nuances of both. So, like, saturated fats, for example, you have different types of saturated fats. Palmitate is almost universally a negative. It it it's like every single study that I've looked at or the vast majority have shown only negative effects to the body. On the other hand, if you look at some of these short chain fats like butyrate, it's a saturated fat, but it shows overwhelmingly positive effects on body. So then you start breaking up based on the chain lengths of stearate, myristic acid, palmitic acid. Like, there's all these different types of saturated fats, and that's where you start getting into the weeds and whatnot. So but, you know, for a person that just wants, like, basic information, most unsaturated fats show positive effects. So that's why I just kinda just steer in that direction, without having to worry about the the intricacies of the saturated fats. But if you do wanna get into the intricacies, then there are definitely some nuances in saturated fats that would indicate, yes, some of them can be really beneficial, and others can be really detrimental. And then, obviously, there's layers under that. You just keep going. Carbohydrates, that's a personal choice. If you wanna consume a lot of carbohydrates, then go for it, especially depends on your goals. For example, if you're interested in doing, some really high intensity, physical training, then you may want to be taking in some level of, carbohydrates. But on the other hand, if you have trouble losing weight and your goal is to to lose body fat and you when you consume carbohydrates, you just you don't feel satiated, then stick to, like, a ketogenic diet or a low carb diet. There's a lot of flexibility there. And we my point being that you just don't have to be tribal. You just have to understand the the the positives and negatives of of each diet type. Yeah. Everything has pros and cons, and, it's never, you know, universal. Like, there's always individual variance as well, you know, especially with food intolerances. You know, some people can't tolerate certain foods. Other people can't or can they can. And even we see, like, proteins and stuff as well. Like, some people can't eat eggs. Doesn't mean eggs are bad. You know, most low carb carnivore people would say eggs are great, but, you know, that even among the carnivore people, there are some people who can't tolerate eggs because of some sensitivities and vice versa in the plant based groups. You know, some people just can't tolerate lectins or nichase or whatever it is. That's mess doesn't necessarily mean they're bad. This just doesn't suit that individual person. So, yeah, depends a lot on the person. Yeah. Exactly. I mean, the level of nuance you can get into this stuff, it's just like when we're talking when we're creating videos, it's broad strokes. I mean, we're talking broad strokes, and people just take it so personally. But in reality, if you were to have a conversation with either one of us, we'd probably be like, okay. Well, what can you tolerate? What can't you tolerate? What do you like? What you don't like? And then you start getting into, like, this tailored nutrition approach, which I I guess people just don't, don't get that sense. What is your, like, plan nutrition plan or, like, overall health routine looks like with exercise and diet? Yeah. So the one thing I don't talk about is my nutrition plan. So the reason why is because I've seen so many people that I deeply respect say what they eat. And the first thing that people say is, well, I'm not gonna listen to this person then. So I just I just keep that a secret. I've never told anybody. I will say, like, for example, the supplements and exercise and stuff just because people aren't as tribal about that stuff. Because when it comes to my content and the the way that I speak, I wanna make sure that people are seeing me as just data driven. It's not based on, like, what I do. Actually, I even have a video where I say I am a hypocrite because I don't because I don't do everything that the data says is optimal. Like, there's I'd say about eighty twenty. I do about 20% of stuff that's just junk that's not against you know, that's not for the data. It's it's completely counterintuitive. Like, eating saturated fats, for example, I would totally do that. So from supplement standpoint, I'm not I I have a few supplements. I take creatine. I'm pretty bullish on it. I take omega threes at not a very high dose, like around a gram. And then I take lutein and zeaxanthin. I wear glasses, so I I like to try to keep up with my eye health. Those are two, that that have good evidence, randomized clinical trials that indicate that they're they're beneficial. And other than that, yeah, I think I think that's it, from a supplement standpoint. From an exercise standpoint, I've been lifting weights for over fifteen years now. I just do two, three times a week. I don't go super extreme. I try to hit near failure. I hit, compound exercises. I make sure I hit my back, my, my chest, abs, shoulders, and, then different I've got my legs broken up by the posterior chain, so, like, the hamstrings, and the glutes, and then the, the the front. So just doing quads and doing a little bit of, calf exercises. Although don't judge me on my calves because they're they're they're they're not of the, the the greatest quality. So, yeah, that's that's kinda what I stick to. And nutritionally, I I always aim for I I do count my calories. Not that everybody has to do that by any means. I've been counting calories for fifteen, sixteen, seventeen years, something like that. So I've got it down pat at this point, and I just try to aim for weight gain at certain points just within a certain range just because I'm trying to build muscle. But on the other hand, when I'm you know, then I I try to cut down. And, eventually, then I get to a point where I just kinda stabilize, and I stay within, you know, let's say, two, three, four, five pounds, something like that, plus or minus. And if I'm within that range, I'm I'm happy. Yeah. Yeah. With a diet, then, yeah, it's kind of yeah. People don't even, like, you know, the problem with that is, like, you know, your diet is naturally gonna change over time. You're not gonna probably eat the same thing ten years from now. And if you change your mind about it a little bit, you know, I've changed my diet slightly. I'm not eating this food anymore. I'm eating this food now. Then people are gonna, like, freak out or they're gonna, you know, say, like, what what is this? So it's yeah. Then it's it's very natural for, you know, kind of things to change. Like, maybe you just, you know, change your exercise routine. You need to change your diet as well. So, yeah, I guess that's the problem with, realizing the context, that the context is always very relevant. Yeah. Definitely. Yeah. And people just get real I mean, it's somewhat understandable. People get, pretty pretty, tied to the diet, especially if you spend, like, let's say, ten years trying to figure out what diet like, you've tried all these different diets. None of them work. You constantly feel frustrated, and then something hits, and you lose body fat. You feel great, and all these different things is of course, it's natural to then think, well, this is the diet. This is the best diet. Like, everybody should be doing this. Why why are people talking about these other diets? They don't work. So I I do understand it from from a certain perspective. It's just like as scientists, as, you know, data driven people, we have to focus on what the average, you know, when you're controlling for variables and when you're, looking at, average results. But, again, there's a lot of nuance to be had. Yeah. Maybe one final thing we can discuss is, like, sleep. So how how important do you think sleep is? You know, it's I would probably argue it might be the most important or second most important. I mean, it's right up it's like I got nutrition and sleep kind of battling it out and then maybe exercise just just a millimeter underneath. So they're all three of those are like the the pillars. Yeah. Sleep is unbelievably important. A few tips for that is to make sure to cut caffeine, you know, let's say by a reasonable time. It's gonna depend on your type of metabolism if you metabolize caffeine very quickly or not. But I usually aim for around 12:00. Actually, right now as we're recording, it's twelve, so I would stop my caffeine intake. Another thing is to sleep in a completely dark room. Make sure that it's a few degrees colder than what you typically, would be kinda living in. So because your your body temperature has to regulate based off that. Try to avoid overstimulation, you know, maybe an hour or thirty minutes before bed, that kind of stuff. And people that study sleep have better tips than I do, but, you know, that's that's what I've been able to to kinda accrue. How do you feel about it? Yeah. I I think it's, you know, very important. But, I guess the interesting thing about sleep is that you still it it's only is is, like, best for you if you also do the other things, like exercise and stuff. Because let's say you sleep nine or ten hours a day, but you don't exercise, then you're probably less healthy than someone who exercises six hour who exercises but sleeps six hours a day. Because exercise is, you know, has all these other benefits in terms of health span and reducing risk of chronic diseases, etcetera, that you don't get from just sleeping nine to ten hours. Just, you know, sleeping is amazing and essential for recovery from exercise and, you know, getting the benefits. And, optimally, you wanna sleep seven to eight hours as it is recommended. But I think, yeah, like, if you if you sleep six hours and you exercise, you're probably gonna be healthier than someone who sleeps nine to ten hours but doesn't exercise. I guess that's maybe a little bit of a hot take, but, you know, both are very important, but sleep is more effective if you also exercise and vice versa. Exercise is more effective if you if you also sleep more. Yeah. I I mostly agree. I think that there's, like, a I think there's a cliff where sleep becomes massively more important than anything. Like, if if you're getting, let's say, repeatedly five hours of sleep I'm just throwing out a number. Five hours of sleep day after day after day, I don't care how much exercise you're doing. I don't care what your nutrition is. You're probably gonna die early. You're probably gonna have dementia. Like, you well, you have a high much higher risk of dementia. You have all these different, categories that that you suddenly fall into this high risk category. I do completely agree that if you're not exercising and you're just focusing on sleep, like, you're missing out on a hue a wealth of of health benefits that you could be experiencing. Not to mention they interplay, with one another. Like, for example, exercise improves sleep, maybe not necessarily right before you go to sleep, but if you, in general, exercise, that that tends to improve, your sleep quality and your sleep duration and stuff like that. So there's a huge interplay between those two, definitely. Yeah. Yeah. Of course. If you are chronically sleep deprived and you're experiencing the symptoms from it, then, yeah, that's that's definitely harmful. But, yeah, like, if you're only sleeping in and kind of if you look at the studies, then sleeping ten hours is actually associated with higher risk. But, you know, that's that's because people who sleep ten hours usually have, like, cancer or some other disease. But, yeah, like, if you're just sleeping ten hours and you're not doing anything else, then, you know, it's not necessarily improving your health. You're getting plenty of sleep, and you're not, like, damaging your health, but you're also not really, like, taking it to the next level, which you would do with the exercise. Yeah. Completely agree. Well, this was a really fascinating and a great conversation. Before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and your work? Just look up Physionic. Just type into Google or chat GPT or wherever, and, you'll you'll find me. It's that that's basically the only place. I'm on YouTube. I analyze studies like, like Sim does, and that's, yeah, that's where you can find me. Great. We'll put the links in the show notes. And, my last question is, was this one piece of advice or habit that you issued up sooner? Habit that I'd done sooner. Oh, well, I started exercising pretty early on. I think the one thing that I wish that I'd focused a little bit more on was my nutrition. I was I spoke about being eighty twenty, you know, 80% doing the right thing. I think when I was earlier on in my life, I did more it was more like fifty fifty. So I think if I just focus a little bit more on, avoiding certain, like, let's say, saturated fats and whatnot, just focusing a little bit more on my heart health and whatnot, I'd probably be a little bit better off. Not that I'm in in bad shape by any means right now, but that would have been something that is something that pops off, off the top of my head. Gotcha. Yeah. An ironic unironically, for me, it would be like, sleeping a bit more, you know, after after my rent that you don't need to sleep at night. But but that that that was because, like, in my early twenties, I was, you know, kind of starting growing my YouTube and, business and stuff like that. So I was kind of shortening my sleep at that point. Yeah. But, yeah, like, I wish I would maybe sleep and get, like, seven to eight hours, consistently, but I don't think they'd had, like, long term negative effects, but, yeah, I'm trying to get that at seven, eight hours now now. Yeah. That's that's a good one. That's a really good one. Yeah. Well, yeah, it was great to talk with you, and ELC runs. Yeah. Definitely. It was a blast. Thanks for having me on. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Sim. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.