Alright. Hello. Happy to be here. And, the reason I chose this particular topic for my speech today was because I was listening to a pretty popular podcast where a renowned doctor was saying that if someone is supporting or promoting supplements then they're immediately disqualified to talk about health, which is obviously not true. There are a lot of supplements out there that are not really effective for anything and there's a lot of misconceptions about supplements. There's no magic pill out there that would replace a healthy lifestyle, but there are indeed several evidence based supplements out there that do have certain health benefits. So that's what I'm gonna be covering in my presentation. And, how many of you take any supplement? You know, vitamin d, omega threes, whatever. So most of you do take some supplements. And, the trend of taking supplements is growing right now. As of 2025, there's over the market cap for supplement industry in The US is, over $200,000,000,000 but it's estimated to double by the year 2034. So, in the next ten years, the supplement industry is expected to double in size, which just highlights the popularity of supplementation. So, I'll just quickly give a brief summary and then I'll dive into more details of these supplements. Here's a list of, some of the most evidence based supplements out there that are backed up by dozens of human clinical trials. So there are human studies on these supplements showing that they work for different purposes and different effects. Number one would be creatine, secondly, omega threes, taurine, ashwagandha, vitamin d, vitamin k, melatonin, NAC, anthraxanthin, lutein and dioxanthin, protein powders, caffeine, aged garlic extract, turmeric, berberine, and glycine. Obviously, there's a few more supplements out there that have benefits and evidence, but these I would consider some of the most robust supplements with the most robust evidence out there. And, in the rest of my presentation, I'm going to go through some of the highlights of these, supplements. Creatine. So, many people might know about creatine as a sports performance supplement, which is true. Creatine is considered the most evidence based supplement out there, especially for sports performance. There's hundreds, if not thousands, of clinical trials showing that creatine supplementation enhances muscle strength, muscle power, muscle mass, and, may even support bone density if con combined with resistance exercise. But over the last few years, scientists have also become more interested and aware of the other benefits of creatine, such as benefits on brain, benefits on mood, benefits on depression, even benefits on endothelial function, and, improving certain other cardiovascular disease risk factors. So creatine is not just a sports supplement. It is the most evidence based sports supplement out there, but it also has other additional, benefits, specifically for the brain, specifically for body composition and certain metabolic health markers. So from the clinical trials out there, you could expect increased muscle mass, increased muscle strength and power from creatine, possibly enhanced cognition and memory as well. There are some clinical trials on elderly people where supplementing larger doses of creatine supports memory and there was actually a recent pilot study on creatine and Alzheimer's where they did see improved memory in Alzheimer's patients. But creatine can also help with things like triglycerides and, fat mass. Next up, omega threes. I think omega threes are very known to have health benefits. Everyone's grandma knows that omega threes are good for you and, research also backs that up. Similar to creatine, there are hundreds of clinical trials on omega three supplementation showing specifically benefits for cardiovascular health. So omega threes, they can be in the form of fish oil, they can be in the form of cod liver oil, algae oil, krill oil, it doesn't really matter. What matters is the content of EPA and DHEA, which are the primary omega three fatty acids. And these omega three fatty acids aren't considered essential, they're considered conditionally essential, but they do have a lot of positive effects on the human body. And the research shows that people who have a higher omega-three status in their blood, so their red blood cells contain more EPA and DHA, these individuals have a significantly lower risk of Alzheimer's, lower risk of heart disease, and lower risk of dying to any cause. So it is worthwhile to have a higher omega three status. Now, you could also consume fish, but, most people aren't eating fish frequently enough to get the adequate amount of omega three's to achieve those benefits. So supplementing some omega threes is another easy thing that people can do and I think most people would benefit from some form of omega three supplements. It can be algae, it can be fish oil, it can be krill oil, etcetera. But there's also research that omega threes help with things like muscle mass. So individuals who supplement omega threes see increased muscle mass and the reason or the theory behind that why it is so is that omega threes lower inflammation and they support protein synthesis by doing that. There's also research about omega threes supporting brain health, so individuals with a higher omega three index have a lower risk of Alzheimer's and dementia and, individuals with higher omega three intake experience significantly lower risk of, these neurodegenerative conditions, later in life. Omega threes, improve your lipid panel. They don't necessarily lower cholesterol, but they do lower, triglycerides, which are a form of lipids, and high triglycerides are a risk factor for diabetes, the risk factor for heart disease, liver disease, and metabolic syndrome. Omega threes lower inflammation, they improve insulin resistance, they increase insulin sensitivity, and ultimately, the main effect of omega threes is a lower risk of heart disease mortality. And the dose appropriate dose for that depends on, the individual and depends on their omega three status. So usually, it's best to measure your omega three status before taking fish oil to see what is your omega three status and what is your omega three index as it's called. The optimal omega three index for the lowest risk of, Alzheimer's and heart disease would be something above eight percent. So, the average western diet will typically result in a omega three index index of around maybe four to five percent. So for the optimal risk reduction, we would want to double that up to eight percent. Taurine has become also quite popular over the last few years, and, taurine is an amino acid, and, it's it's usually used in sports performance. And there is evidence that taurine supplementation improves sports performance, specifically endurance and the strength endurance, but there's also a lot of metabolic health benefits to taurine, such as lower blood pressure, lower cholesterol and lipids, and lower blood sugar. So there's quite several, like, clinical trials approving that, and the dose can be anywhere between one to six grams per day for taurine. Melatonin. So melatonin is considered a sleep hormone, which is true. Melatonin is very important in regulating the circadian rhythms and, your sleep. But, melatonin also is a powerful antioxidant. Most of your antioxidant repair happens during your sleep, and melatonin is, one of the primary agents that coordinates, this process. Melatonin regulates growth hormone. It regulates glutathione. Regulates autophagy, so it controls a lot of this antioxidant activity in your sleep. And the research on melatonin supplementation also supports the idea that melatonin has anti inflammatory and antioxidant effects. So in clinical trials, larger doses of melatonin supplementation up to ten milligrams a day has anti inflammatory effects, and, it also lowers lipids such as cholesterol and triglycerides. In smaller doses such as zero point one to up to three milligrams, melatonin has primarily sleep benefits. So it reduces the time it takes you to fall asleep and increases sleep quality and sleep duration overall. So, the dose of how much melatonin someone should take depends a lot on their goal. Are they just trying to improve their sleep a little bit or are they trying to improve certain, biomarkers? There's also some individuals who are taking insane amounts of melatonin, such as two hundred milligrams or one hundred milligrams. Obviously, there's a very limited research about what are the effects of that, but melatonin is generally very safe. Even if you take very large doses, one hundred, two hundred milligrams, you might feel a bit, you know, more tired in the morning or groggy, which is one of the side effects of melatonin, but there's no other harmful effects. And, one myth about melatonin is that it would suppress your natural melatonin production, which is not true. Even doses of fifty milligrams of melatonin hasn't been seen to suppress natural melatonin production. Turmeric, so this, Indian, spice, most notoriously known for its anti inflammatory effects, and, that is one of the more evidence based effects of turmeric that in clinical trials, it lowers, inflammation markers such as CRP. But, turmeric also has other effects such as lower cholesterol, lower triglycerides, and lower ray circumference. Through the anti inflammatory effects, there's clinical trials showing that turmeric also lowers joint pain, so it might be useful for arthritis. Ashwagandha, another Indian herb, and ashwagandha is most known for improving sex hormones like testosterone and estrogen, but it also supports sleep and lowers stress and anxiety. So the reason why ashwagandha has benefits on sleep and sex hormones is through lowering cortisol and, lowering stress. Interestingly, there is also research that ashwagandha might increase VO2max, which is a marker of cardiorespiratory fitness, and a higher v r two max is associated with, longevity and reduced mortality. So the mechanisms for that aren't fully clear, but it might have to do with the adaptogenic effects of ashwagandha that your body adapts to the stress a bit more, easily. Glycine and NAC. So this is one of my favorite supplements personally, and the combination of glycine and NAC is, interesting because, both of them are precursors to glutathione. And glutathione is a powerful antioxidant in the body which, has a lot of, liver benefits, heart benefits, and brain benefits. With age, you see a decline in glutathione, which would make it plausible that increasing it with with something like glycine n a c or something else, could have some anti aging benefits. And there are quite a several recent clinical trials on this combination of glycine and n a c that, in elderly people, it improves physical functions such as walking speed, grip strength, and just physical performance, while also improving cardiovascular risk factors such as, lowering inflammation, lowering fat mass, lowering blood pressure and insulin resistance, and also increasing, endothelial function. So, glycine and NAC are more effective for older people who have lower gliothant status. The effects for younger individuals might be much smaller but these supplements individually can also still be used by younger people for, other reasons. So glycine helps with collagen synthesis as well so it's good for skin health. Glycine also helps with sleep and glycine also helps with, lowering blood sugar for example. So even younger individuals can take quite large doses of glycine with, great benefits. Astaxanthin is, a carotenoid which can be found in salmon and certain algae. And, the most notorious effect of astaxanthin is that it protects the skin against UV damage. So it's good for skin and aging and reducing photo pigmentation. Azaxanthin also has other benefits shown in clinical trials such as improved cholesterol panel, lower inflammation, as well as lower blood pressure. Lutein and zeaxanthin are two another two more carotenoids and, the most notorious effect of these carotenoids is eye health. There's, several clinical trials showing that, lutein and zeaxanthin supplementation improves vision and eyesight, but these carotenoids also have slight skin antiaging benefits because of being powerful antioxidants and, also improving inflammation, oxidized LDL, and blood sugar. Berberine is a herb. It's called nature's metformin because it lowers blood sugar. And it is true that berberine does lower blood sugar, but it's not nearly as effective as metformin in lowering blood sugar. But berberine is better in lowering cholesterol. So, berberine has benefits on metabolic syndrome, certain cardiovascular disease risk factors, and body composition. So it can help with the visceral fat, specifically around the organs. Vitamin d, most people tend to be low in vitamin d status because of not spending enough time outside. And, obviously, the vitamin d pill isn't going to replace the sunlight. You're getting a lot of other benefits from the sunlight such as infrared radiation and UV radiation and the circadian rhythm regulation, but, vitamin d pills can still provide some benefits mostly by raising your vitamin d status. So it's better to have optimal vitamin d status or normal vitamin d status with a supplement than to be deficient in it and not take a supplement. Right? So because you're not getting all the benefits of sunlight from the pill, you're still getting some benefits by raising your vitamin d status. The vitamin d supplements specifically have also been seen to improve testosterone, lower cholesterol, and lower triglycerides. So there are some additional benefits as well. And recently, last year, there was a study showing that vitamin d also, reduced the speed at which telomeres shorten. So telomeres are these protective caps on chromosomes that protect your DNA, and they are considered one of the hallmarks of aging. So there might be some additional longevity benefits from vitamin d supplements as well. Alright. So what supplements have some limited evidence? I went through some of the more evidence based supplements out there, but there's obviously dozens, if not hundreds of supplements out there as well. So, multivitamins there is some evidence that multivitamins improve cognition in elderly people, but, that could be mostly because, diet quality tends to decrease as you get older. Elderly people have slightly worse diet quality and they don't eat enough food, which is why they might be deficient in certain, micronutrients. And taking a multivitamin in that scenario just fills the gap. If you're with an otherwise healthy diet, a balanced diet, then you don't necessarily need a multivitamin. And, in clinical trials, multivitamin supplementation hasn't been seen to reduce the risk of, all cause mortality and reduce the risk of other chronic diseases. Urolithin a is a pretty popular supplement online, but there is not that much human studies on that or the studies that have been done on urolithin a have found that although it improves lower body strength, it has no effect on upper body strength, and it has no effect on body composition either. So there's very small benefits to be gained from urethane a. Synolytics, so these are certain compounds such as fisetin, quercetin, and apigenin that, help to eliminate these senescent cells that accumulate during aging. Senescent cells are called zombie cells that spread information to neighbouring cells and senolytics help to eliminate these cells. Unfortunately, we don't have any published clinical trials on senolytics yet. We do know from animal studies that they do eliminate senescent cells and some of them might also extend lifespan in animals, but the human data is still to be verified. Spermidine is, like a poloamine that you can get from certain foods like mushrooms and vegetables and cheeses. So higher spermidine consumption, people who have higher amounts of spermidine in their diet have lower mortality and they live longer, but clinical trials on spermidine supplementation have not found significant effects. There are a few clinical trials showing that it might improve cognition, but, nothing definitive yet. So it's better generally to consume your spermidine from foods, mushrooms, vegetables, and, cheese. And lastly, NMN and NR, they're very popular, but, the clinical evidence for NMN and NR has been somewhat, disappointing. You know, they do have slight anti inflammatory effects. They improve insulin sensitivity. They do raise NAD status, but, that's pretty much it. We don't have that much evidence for everything anything else. And animal studies on NMN and NR have also shown that they don't necessarily extend lifespan. I recently made a pretty comprehensive video on my YouTube channel where I go through a 100 supplements and I'm ranking them from worst to best. So what's the best supplement out there? What's the worst? So you can see what do I think about a 100 different types of supplements on my YouTube channel at Simland. So, I'll go through, okay, what kind of supplements would you create, what kind of stacks would you create for yourself. When it comes to longevity purposes, some good longevity supplements would be omega threes, glycine, n a c, t m g that I didn't cover, but it's a methyl donor and supports methylation. A lot of people might have poor methylation due to genetics. Vitamin k two, which supports bone health and, helps with reducing plaque in the arteries in clinical trials, vitamin d because most people are deficient in vitamin d and it's a good safe bet, and niacinamide, which is a cheap NAD booster. So rather than taking NMN or NR, you could also take niacinamide or niacin, which are much cheaper than NMN and NR, and it's equally as effective. Skin antiaging, Azaxanthin, collagen peptides, although controversial, there's pretty consistent evidence that collagen peptides do help with skin wrinkles and skin elasticity. Hyaluronic acid also helps with skin hydration. Niacinamide helps to protect the skin against sun damage. And these carotenoids like lycopene, lutein, and zeaxanthin also have skin benefits. And lastly, vitamin c, which is a a cofactor for collagen synthesis. Metabolic health, so if you have insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, etcetera, supplements for that would be taurine, omega threes, glycine, n a c, berberine, aged garlic extract, which lowers lipids and blood sugar as well as blood pressure, curcumin, ginger, chromium picolinate, that's most beneficial for insulin sensitivity, and benethiamine, that also lowers blood sugar. Ocular health, so eyesight, axaxanthin, lutein, zeaxanthin, and melatonin. Melatonin has shown to also reduce the risk of macular degeneration. Sleep, glycine, l theanine, melatonin, ashwagandha, and magnesium. Stress, glycine, l theanine, melatonin, ashwagandha, magnesium, and rhodiola rosea. And if you can't decide what kind of supplements to take, then this would be like a starter pack. So these are supplements that I think most people would benefit from no matter their situation. Omega threes for raising the omega three status. The majority of people have suboptimal omega three status so it's a safe bet to take omega threes. Azaxanthin, mostly for skin benefits to reduce the photo damage on the skin. Glycine for collagen synthesis and just metabolic health. Vitamin k two for reducing plaque in the arteries and supporting bone health. Vitamin d three for supporting vitamin d status, magnesium because over 50% of people aren't getting enough magnesium from their diet, and it's pretty hard to get the optimal amounts of magnesium from foods because of soil erosion and, things that reduce the amount of minerals in our food and niacinamide as a cheap daily NAD booster to, support NAD production which declines with age as well as the other benefits of niacinamide for the skin. Now the thing with supplements is that the supplements you buy from store or Amazon tend to have very bad labeling. Research has found that up to eighty percent of supplements have, inaccurate labeling. So, they don't contain the ingredients in the supplement that they say on the label. Only 20% of the supplements out there actually have accurate labeling. So, you're getting what you're actually buying. That's unfortunate because of supplements aren't regulated. So there's a lot of, sketchy players out there that are just selling you, placebo pills or things that have wrong ingredients. So this is something, us as consumers just need to be aware of and we need to make our purchasing decisions, more mindfully. So how do you know if the supplements you're buying are actually, you know, they contain what they actually say they do? You need to look for certificates of analysis. You need to look for third party testing. So this is just an example of what a certificate of analysis would look like that it, is done by a third party that shows, okay, this supplement actually contains what it says on the label. So these, you can find them on the company's website. If they don't share their third party testing, then, it's kind of a sketchy thing that, okay, why are they hiding it? So you can email them and ask them, can you show us your third party testing or your certificate of analysis? If they show it to you, then that's a good sign that they're more reliable as a as a company. And, yeah. That's it from me. The re one of the reasons I also made this presentation is because I'm writing a book about supplements that's not ready yet, but my current book, the latest book, The Longevity Leap, is, available for sale right now. You can actually buy it from, the comp the organizer stand. They're selling it actually there. So thank you.