The advancement in gene therapy, especially in China right now, the the the advancement is so fast. So we think that one fifty is totally possible as you know, it's it's quite realistic. Cellular senescence is a known progress, but accumulation of the senescence cells is the biggest problem. Zico, welcome to the show. Thank you for having me. It's my first time doing podcast, and, pretty nervous because, well, it's not my native language. So, hook me on the English. Yeah. But I think we'll still have a very, interesting discussion. We met a few weeks ago in Japan at a Tokyo summit, and you gave me one of, these kind of senolytics supplements that you're making a PCC one, which we'll talk about in this episode. And, coincidentally, you know, I thought it's kind of, like, you know, just a senolytic supplement, but then also a few weeks from from that, I saw some articles written about your company of these Chinese scientists, coming up with a pill that can make humans live to the age of a 150. So I thought, and then then I recognized your face on some of the photos. So then I thought, hey. Maybe we should, have a podcast and discuss it. Yeah. That was, like, exaggeration. Actually, that was not what we said. Right. We said, like like, one fifty is, we think one fifty is possible, but it's not only one single pill. Like, you need to combine, like, multiple advanced, therapy. And because we see the advancement, like like, growing rapidly, so so that, we we reckon we could, we could, break the limit or the the the Haif, like, limit limit, through, like, gene therapy and such. Right? Because, with Haif, limit, it says that, human could possibly is, has the, one twenty cap. Right? But, I would say that the advancement in gene therapy, especially in China right now, that, we have seen, the the the the advancement so fast. So we think that one fifty is totally possible. It's it's it's quite realistic. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it would make sense if you are overcoming the Hayflick limit, which, know, we can talk about it a little bit later, but essentially describes the point, like, the lifespan of a cell at after which it turns senescent. And, if if we are able to, you know, postpone that, then, yeah, we could we're extending the the the human lifespan limit, which, yeah, people think it's a 120, some people say it's a 150, different opinions. But, yeah, like, you could just add extra years to the human lifespan if you just overcome this one of the limitations in our biology. But, yeah, maybe we can start with, then, so what is this, xenolytic that you've made, a PCC one? And, what makes it different from some other xenolytics that people have heard about, like fisetin and quercetin? Yeah. So PCC one is a b type, turmeric, prusanidine that occurs naturally in certain grape seed, cocoa beans or cranberries and few other, plants. And, in nature, the content is actually really low. Among known sources, African cocoa beans had some of the highest level, but still only on the order of a few parts of per thousand. So, and the raw material themselves are quite expensive. So what makes p c c one different is that, it stands out as a senolytic because it's the it's the it's the the mechanism and the dosing profile. So p c c one can selectively enter cells and act on the mitochondria outer membrane, triggering a burst of RS in cells. They are already under high stress, high oxidative stress. And senescent cells are right at that critical straddle, right? So this extra ROS push caused them to collapse. Whereas in normal cells, the ROS increase is too small to do harm. So most classical senolytics such as dasatinib plus, quercetin or phycetin, works by, inhibiting pro survival pathway and enzymes that are present in both normal and senescent cells. Senescent cells just express them at higher levels, right? And that makes those control tricky. You often need like gram level doses before you get meaningful selective, clearance of senescent cells. So by contrast, p c seven one works at microgram to milligram scales and still shows strong selectivity for senescent cells. This is particularly variable because, senescent and non senescent cells within the same organ are highly, heterogen heterogeneous. Yeah. He hetrogenous. Sorry. For for the pronunciation. Yeah. A compound that can sense that difference. Right? Like PCC one, has a big practical advantage. Mhmm. Gotcha. So it's made of, this grapeseed extract you mentioned. And, you also said that it's not really found in, like, foods or it's, like, very rarely found in foods. Yeah. Mhmm. Is it In in grapeseed extract, we we we have seen that, the highest, we have found basically, we we have bought, like, the most of the grapeseed extract market. And, we have tested out. The paper is coming out. And, we have seen that the highest, potency is about, like, 0.5 to 1%. And, so there's a lot of noise in the in the compound, in in in the in the in the ingredient. That means that and also with the poor bioavailability, that means that it it's not gonna work. So what we have done is the we have we we have the technology to to purify this to to a to a much higher level and adding in the absorption technology to to make you have the the the right dosage. Mhmm. Gotcha. So how do you make it then? You are just extracted from, fees. Our technology starts from, natural mixtures, like, such as, like, green tea and, cocoa extract, and then use the, and and and and and and also a grape grape seed extract as well. And then use, like, multi step, provocation and separation to enrich the PCC one to a much higher per, purity. In simple terms, we take what nature gives us and distill out the PCC one fraction so it can be used in more controlled, standardized way for health and longevity applications. Mhmm. Gotcha. What about the what is your opinion of senescence sales? So you mentioned that the headlines, about one fifty are a bit over exaggerated with this particular single ingredient, but, senescent cells are, yeah, thought to be one, contributor to aging or more like even like a outcome of aging, so more the effect of aging. So what is your opinion of what's the potential of longevity if, we target sales in essence for humans? It's a great question. So so this, what we are sure of is that, accumulation of senescent cells, in theory, is that, it it will cause, like, a, neuro digi age related diseases. So, not to talk about not not only talking about, like, extending lifespan, but, extending the health span alone has a huge value, has a huge value for clearing our centers themselves. And, the current approach in in our, in the industry, which is, like, there are a lot of synthetic companies and and and and developing medicine and drugs. The targets, like, diseases, which I think is, is not the way our longevity field is should be aiming. Right? Like like, we we should aim for preventative medicine instead of, like, when when you have, like, irreversible, disease that you use this kind of, like, the the the technique, which is the clearing out the missing cells to to to try to reverse the damage. So that is my view for for for this. We I think that it has a much, much bigger value in the preventative, medicine field instead of, like, the, reversing the the damage form from diseases. Yeah. So you think that, senolytics or clearing out these senescent cells would be more preventive? Yep. More in a preventive health, approach rather than treatment. I would say it will work on treating some disease as well. I'm not I'm not I'm not, like, having that idea out, but, I'm not, but I think that, preventative is more valuable than treating. Yeah. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. Interesting. And and a lot of these, chronic diseases have a higher burden of senescent cells, if I'm not mistaken. So, it might, you know, it might be that the association that just being sick increases the amount of senescent cells. Do you think the senescent cells are causally linked there so that they actually causing, or contributing to, these age related diseases like dementia and, diabetes or kidney disease? That's a good question. Like, I think in this field, that is what we want to find out. Right? Like, I'm talking. Yeah. And the and the the mechanism of, like, the the the this is still not yet, completely mapped. So but I think that we would sure certainly that's a great help because, senescent cells are actually doing damage in the area, wherever the the the the the the, the disease is located. So I would say that's why we we have seen that in in in some of the studies. Like, it has, like, reversed some of the symptoms, in in animal. It has, and also it helped with, like, chemotherapy, by reducing yeah. Like, applying synonymity, with with chemotherapy, it also reduces the the the tumor size by, like, around like, some of them around thirty to fifty percent. But, in human, that is something that we are not sure of. But, I would say that it will certainly help. Yes. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. That's interesting. Like, recently, a few weeks ago, there was also this study on the bowhead whales, which, can live to the age of 250. And, they discovered that one of the reasons why they're able to live so long is because bowhead whales have this very powerful DNA repair mechanisms that, so, yeah, like, let's say, senescent cells are senescent cells are natural responses for the Hayflick limit and to prevent the cells from turning cancerous. So they are useful in that sense that we don't, you know, is it better to have a senescent cell and age than to get cancer and die young? So, it has its kind of evolutionary reason we develop senescent cells. And, these bowhead whales, rather than cells turning senescent, they actually have a very powerful DNA repair that, is one of the reasons probably they live so long. I want to take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices, which are the Boncharge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes. They do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin antiaging, hormone optimization, pain management, and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes, especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the Bond Charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most regular Therapeuticisors don't have the right wavelengths of light, which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Boncharge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research, and they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code SIIM, s I I m, for a 15% discount. You also mentioned that you have a kind of a different delivery mechanism. So you developed this, way for PCC to be more bioavailable and, also safer. So can you, like, elaborate, like, what makes why is it What what how did you develop that and how does it differ from, like, regular analytics? Yes. So we we we mainly improved the oral bio bioavailability. That is how much PCC one actually get into the body after you swallow them. Right? The detailed distribution of PCC one across different organ is still under active study. This and, so we don't know the optimal PCC one concentration for for SMS themselves, for for for each organ because they act differently. But, where the the the dosage of the p c c one is relatively really low, and, it does not because the mechanism is, it only targets the the RS for the high RS for senescent cells. So it's different from, like, the the fisetine or or or or quercetine, that has, I would say, it has a much bigger safety profile because the, the the selectivity of the the senescent cells and and and and normal cells. So so this part is the what what makes it different. And the the absorption is through, because the dosage of the, of the PCC one right now is, in in mice. It's around, like, twenty to forty milligram per kilo, in in in in mice. So it, and and, and using the standardized, body service area scaling, that translates up roughly one twenty to two fifty milligram per day as a synergetic dose, for fifty to seventy five kilogram adults. And, but but one one more thing that I should mention is that, because, you you ask for, like, it has other effect. Not only the, synthetic, actually, because you were mentioning, like, DNA repair and and and and and things. So I was I was thinking maybe, like, at the, if you if you if you're saying the, it is targeting, like, other hallmarks of aging, actually, like, it has, it has much, it has, like, I think, seven to eight hallmarks. But the the primary one is the cellular senescence and the chronic information. Because in in lower dose, it acts as the xenomorphic. So the xenomorphic dose for human is still under refined. And, our current estimate is around, like, twenty five to thirty milligram per day. And, so we conducted the the internal testing in in collaboration for, with the clinics to find that the daily intake of one fifty milligram of PCC one shows, some effectiveness, but not particularly some significant. So it it was merely comparable to an enhanced version of quercetin. So due to its, strong hydrophilicity, PCC one has very poor, gastrointestinal, tolerance in human. So making it necessary necessary to improve its delivery efficacy. So we've spent, like, over a year developing a new formula to, make it suitable for oral administration in human and further refinements to the formulation will still be needed in the future. Yep. Mhmm. Gotcha. I don't know if I answer you, clear clearly. So if I'm not, then maybe you can Yeah. What what what what's the difference with so it has, like, different effects at different doses. What's the difference between the senolytic and xenomorphic effects? Yes. So, around, like, 50 in in in in the in vitro. So, around fifty micromolar, PCC one mainly suppresses the SSP. So this is, like, the synomorphic range. And around, like, one hundred to, two hundred micromolar, PCC one started to act as a senolytic, which is selectively killing senescent cells. But, in mice model, the, as I mentioned, is around, like, twenty to forty milligram per, per kit, kilogram. So, I would say that it's still, like, under active study, like like, and also, like, refining the dosage for for optimal use for senolytic and sine movie. So this is the current, progress. Mhmm. Gotcha. You've done some studies on mice. So what have you found from there? We have done study on mice and and and not only mice, and also on human. With mice, we find that very interestingly. So I was, we I I would say we started this, precisely one, like, PCC one study, since the, the nature metabolism study. I don't know if you've read that, which is the in in 2021 showing that the, presiding c one has the, the effects of extending mice lifespan, by 9.4%. And, also, in in the in in in the remaining lifespan is about, like, sixty four point two percent. So that was the the originally identified through the joint work through the Chinese, Academy of Science and Mayo Clinic, and later follow-up mechanism study where it's, carried out by Chinese longevity researchers. So I would say even today, the mechanism of PCC one is not completely mapped. Right? And, the current evidence suggests that the, p c c one interact with membrane protein on senescent cell. And, so, in in in our study, we we have find we we have we have also replicate some of the some of the the part that that previous, my study has done, which is the, clearing out senescence cells. But at first glance, we have saw that, right after taking the PCC one, the hair growth and also some of the hair, has became, I would say, like, the mice looked much younger, like like, right after, like, two to four weeks, I think. Around, like, I think I think four weeks four weeks. Yes. So Mhmm. We've seen a a rapid hair growth, like, between the control and and the pieces you want treated mice, and that was the first glance. And and we thought, wow, this is, like, something really different. And also the the hair became how how how would I say this? Like, a bit more shiny? And also you, like, you can tell that you from the hair itself, it looks much more youthful. So that that was the first glance. And and and and after that, we have done, like, different studies on on mice showing that, not only in cell, but also we have we have tested out on on the senescence tissues to show that, it has a decrease in the cell, the the the senescence beta galactosate galactosate or or something. I got it. Okay. Yeah. Did I did I pronounce that right? I think so. Yeah. Right. We have see we have see that that it has a deduct deduction in in this markets, in in in the in the tissue level. And, also, not only that, we have also tested out the, comparing, like, the, a lot of different, antiaging ingredient in the market for skin tissues in in animal, to show that, p PCC one has the the strongest and the only one that has the the the the the, significant the significant effect on decreasing the senescent cells in skin tissues. So so this is the the the animal study that we have done. And after that, we have done the bioavailability study, in in in in mice model. And, so it shows that our current formulation has a much much better, absorption rate, which is the current current, so which has increased threefold. So the current absorption rate for the the the pure PCC one right now is about, like, three to 5%. And, so imagine, like, if you have, like, a low concentration product and, and also with that, there's a lot of different compound within the ingredient. That means that that that a lot of noise might interrupt with the absorption itself. And not only that, the without the absorb absorption technology, then you only get, like, three to five percent. Then the optimal that then it's really hard to achieve the optimal dose. Yeah. And yeah. So that's the animal study. Right. So, you, it has, like, a three to 5% absorption. How much is it with Yeah. How much is it with, like, other regular synthetics, like fisetin or quercetin? I was, it's, it's I remember it's around, like, one to one to three percent, like, even lower. That's why you, like, you need, like, a much bigger dose. So and and, and, if anyone is taking, like, other senolytic, I recommend that you you always look for, like, the liposomal, or, like, or or, like, a liposomal, version of it. I would say this is, better than than the, the without the technology. Yeah. So and and in the my most study, 9.4% increase in lifespan. So, I mean, it's not like a huge amount, but it's still, quite a lot. So let's say 10% increase in, lifespan. That's, you know for humans, that would be, like, around seven, eight, maybe ten years. Yeah. Yeah. So that is the, because I I would say that they have tested out on aged mice, and the that is the they have converted the remaining lifespan into the the whole total lifespan because the remaining lifespan has increased about, like, 64.2%. So that is impressive for, like, age model. We have compared that to, like, other study, that has, that also uses the, age mice model. And that is the I would say, I will I will rank that as top three, for age model. But not only that. There's a there's a study in 2007 by a Japanese team. I can send you the research later. It's very, very interesting. To show that the family has in like, they have they have they have done the study for, like, two two two to something years, and they have started taking the the prasanidine, I mean, as, like, the derivative of prasanidine, since young since since birth. And, it shows that, without taking it, in two years' time, all the control died. And the ones that takes it has eighty percent survival rate, eighty five percent survival rate. And they have stopped the study because it has been done for too long, like, two two something years. And, there's, like, I can show I I can send you the study later. It's very interesting. And this is something that we are we are also developing, which is the derivative. And we have already found that, in some precisely, molecules because we we we do have, we we have our own, like, synoletic, and syno morphic compound library to to test them out on different models. We we have also found, we have also found that in some formulation and also with the the the derivative, it has a even better effect than PCC one itself. So right now, what we are doing is that, we are testing them out. And, also, the study is gonna be complete next year, I would say within one year time. But, right now, we are doing a comparison, between, like, this formulation with, like, rapamycin and other and and others, like, EKG and others. Yeah. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. So it extended lifespan more in older mice. So this would be that, in older individuals, older, animals, the benefits are greater because, you have a higher burden of the senescent cells at older age. Whereas if you're young, you're, you know, less you're gaining less benefits because you don't have that many senescent cells yet, if that's correct. Yes. Yes. But the interesting part for for the the presiding directive is that they have the con the the the mice has taken them since birth, but still extended the lifespan by 85 the survival rate of eighty five percent in two years time. Comparing the control. So we this is still under study, so we don't know the the final conclusion yet. And, but in theory, it is the, for for older people, it's gonna be much more effective because the burden is is clear. Right. Yeah. So but, you know, I guess the risk here is that, you know, senescent cells have some benefits, so they, help to, you know, protect against cancer. And, so with younger and they support wound healing. So, like, do younger individuals, you know, I guess the risk is that if you clear out all the senescent cells when you're, young, then, you might, you know, increase the risk of cancer or something like that down the line, or what do you think about that? With this, this is I would say this is a crucial point because several existing, synthetics can also unintentionally kill immune cells and impair, like, immune surveillance that you that's what new may. So which may increase the cancer risk. For example, like, recent work in the oral science and hemostatic, medicine show that the dasatinib plus pacetine combination can actually promote skin, papilloma progress progression in mice by eliminating, like, senescent cells, but also weakening local, immune surveillance. So far, PCC one appears to behave much different very different. So the current data suggest that PCC one not only does not compromise, immune surveillance, it might also have direct antitumor effect. So a reason like, MPJ aging, like, the single cell study found that PCC one can remodel the hematopoietic, immune system. So it inhibits the the NF, x NFXB and MAPK signaling in macrophages. So promoting the th one polarization and strengthening, strengthens the, anti tumor responses without roughly suppressing immunity. And in parallel, the nature of communication paper showed that the PCC one can reverse aging driving in new, microenvironment remodeling and suppress tumor metast metastatic Metastasis. Yeah. Metastasis. Yes. In a, melanoma, model by rebalancing t 17 neutral field d t, c d eight t cell as assets. So mechanistically, PCC one is, clearly multitarget and quite complex. But the overall picture is that it kills innocent cells and supports antitumor immunity at the same time. So that is the conclusion that the summary that we have right now. Do you have, like, any human studies planned, or have you done them already? Yeah. Yeah. We we have done it. So for the, the human study, we we together we we partner with clinic, and we have run a small, pilot study in in older adults. Like, after just three days of oral PCC one, we observe the reductions in several senescence and inflammatory markers in blood cells, like, such as p 21, s a beta galactate, and, SASB factors such as IO six, IO eight, BE, GF. And, and and, we have observed, like, some individual case for t and alpha. We we have seen that the markets has dropped for around, like, 40 to 50% within three days, and and then we have done and and the measurement was the so that's so the whole protocol was, first, you measure your baseline. Right? And after that, you take three days of pause. And on the fifth day, since the first, measurement, which is two days after you've taken the the PCC one. We have we have done another measurement to see that in in the the the markets I mentioned, it has around 50% on average drop for fifty to eighty six years old. Mhmm. And, so with you, I guess, you you could be you you have a a a slice a slightly drop as well, but I'm not sure how much because you are so health yeah. Right. So, the the the people you've tested it on were 50 80 years old. Yeah. 86. Okay. 86. Okay. So they have, yeah, significantly more senescent cells due to aging and up to 40 to 50% reduction in some of the markers, you you said? That's right. In SAS and some of them even go to the to go to, like, 80% deduction, for SASB, such as, like, IO six or IO eight. Gotcha. So Yeah. Mhmm. But but I would say but but the thing is, even with the even the the dosing and the and the and the frequency of dosing is this part is still uncertain because it's very different, for individuals. Some of them, they are much older. They are much more burden. Some of them even have cancer or potentially, they have much higher level of, and, senescence. And, they also the they they also the the the the markets also recover from the senescence, from from the senolytic. That means that, for example, within one month time or some of them, like, within two to three weeks time, they would recover from from a low range to a much higher range. And then they would need to, like so that means that they they they still have that burden in them. And, this is something that we are, we are still, studying. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. Yeah. With with the analytics, the research so far with other analytics like quercetin and, fisetin and stuff is, you know, there's evidence in animals, but the human evidence is kinda limited that, we don't have yet, like, a protocol of, okay, how much should you take? How frequently should you do it? You know, is it once a month? Is it every day? Is it every other week? Or something like that. So, right now, it's kind of the people are doing their own protocols based on based on their own opinions and some of the available studies out there. So yeah. You know? I would definitely like to get you know, before I would consider, I guess, using it or recommending it to this analytics, you know, I would need to see, like, okay. What is the actual protocol that do do you think there is an actual protocol, or does it all depend on the person's age and, their health status and those kind of things? I would say, it really depending on the, the the the markets. Like like, you should always measure. Right? And that shows that how much burden that you have from the SSP and all of the assets. So don't do, like, protocol just by watching some YouTube video and then because they might not work for you. Right? And, from from out from the the renowned scientist, well, which is passed away now, like, Judith Campisi, doctor Judith Campisi said that, for older adult, which is around, like, two weeks. But, I would say always measures. Like, if you for example, right now, what we are doing is that, some of our clients and and and the the the patients, they they are not patients. That some of our clients, they have been taking it they have been taking it for for for, a month, and then they will remeasure, like, after two weeks. And then they will remeasure after a month. Then you will see that, okay, in two weeks' time, since the baseline I have recovered, let's say they had 20, of I o six in the beginning. And then after they have taken it, they have reduced, like, 70%, which is, like, six, which is in the normal range. And but then within two weeks' time, it it has recovered from from, six to, like, 16, which is almost to their to their baseline. Then they should consider maybe in two in in two weeks time, they they should take it again. But but if they see that the the the increase of the of the the the inflammatory markers or the SST, has not increased that that much, then they might consider to wait a bit. Because I would say, as you mentioned and also that's what we know that senile senescence is the known progress. But accumulation of the senile senescence cells is the biggest problem. Mhmm. So we don't want to we don't want people to have that, the the the the risk of the burden. Yeah. Mhmm. Yeah. What what kind of markers then should people, look at to assess their cell sales innocent burden? There are, like, some indirect markers, but are there, like, more direct markers as well? It's I would say it's very com com complicated. And, right now, if and, oh, and, also, like, senescent cells is in all the different organs. Right? And, you will never be sure even with just blood test because you will get the senescent cells from the cell blood cell. But if you for example, it might have the more it's more distributed in other organs than we we might not know. But the only thing that but what we know right now is in in the blood cell, what you can measure, Some of them are the SASP, which is secreted by the senescent cells, such as, like, the IO six, IO eight, TNF alpha. And and that is more indirect. And and some of them, like, p 21, e 16, that is, like, the senescence market or the, like, sal beta galactate canacetate. Right? And, and but these are not commercially available. Like, this is, like, not, it's it's just something that we are working on and tackling to to to to bring, like, more affordable measurement to the to the to the field. Yeah. And also, it's it has shown that even p 21 sentences are different to p 16 sentences. So this is, like, the the recent advancement in the last couple of months. So I would say this feels quite is really new. We are still, like, learning and and finding out more. Yeah. Mhmm. So one of the interesting things you mentioned were the effects on retina and the skin. So what what is, like, the role of, these senescent cells in in eye health and skin health? So first of all, the skin data you're referring to did not come from our lab. It was done by an overseas group, like like, working on skin and antiaging. We found that relatively small daily dose around, like, twelve to five to five milligram p c one combining with their formulation, I think it's PQQ and and, almost thing I forgot. That had were were enough to to improve, like, skin aging markets in in the model. So the but the, and the pharmacokinetic, works just that this is one is absorbed and metabolized efficiently. So, so this is, like, the the, the study that, and, also, their data I don't think their data is out yet. Right? It's for for the for the skin aging. We have done our own to show that, it it it has around, I think, it's around, like, 60% more, more, more efficient than, like, the other senolytic compounds. And for the retina, so yeah. So in each retina, PC one has shown to reduce, like, multiple type of senescent cells and SSP factors, like, improve retinal, structure and, significantly enhance, visual function. So sometimes bring it back close to, young level, like, young levels in in mice models. So the the single cell RNA, sequencing of the p c c one, treated age retinas, revealed, strong anti inflammatory effect and reinforcement of the protective pathways, including the modulation of the NF, NFXB NFKB NFKB, signaling in ocular tissues. Together, these data suggest, PCC is not just prolonging life, but also protecting, high value organs like eye at the functional level. Yeah. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. So, yeah, needs to be done some more interesting research, but, yeah. So the, you know, senescent cells I think the one of the major causes of intrinsic skin aging are senescent cells based on the research that, excess sun UV radiation and sun exposure lead to the accumulation of more senescent cells in the skin and, you know, other things as well like smoking. They create senescent cells in the skin, which is why smoking also accelerates skin aging, for example. So, yeah, that's kind of a, you know, potential that could be for skin and anti aging benefit as well. It it is. And, very interestingly in the this is something that we're working on as well, not only the the PCC one, but, the recent study in in China has advanced so much in the the the in the advanced treatment like CAR T or gene therapy. We are also working with, some some partners on on the a technology called single reverse, which is the reprogramming of the senescent cells. And and, and and and the application is, skin aging. So that means that, in in future, we we we can if it goes well, which, currently, we are still under, like, we were doing the the annual study. If it goes well, we will see that, in future, you might not have, like, some missing cells in your skin anymore. And that means that, you you you you will stay young. And then also the benefit is of that is that it's very different from the the fillers or or, like, the injection for for collagen because, Right. Because the distribution of your collagen, right, is, is how you originally distribute it. You we just trigger the gene for for for it's a cocktail for for for clearing us in essence, promoting the collagen reduction. That means that you will stay the same as how you look on your end, but not Gotcha. But not like uneven distributed fillers. Mhmm. Right. Well, I guess, I think you probably would this in essence sales probably like to talk about more of the wrinkles, but, the, you know, with a, to have other structural changes with the face, that aren't just like wrinkles. I think the senescence cells would, yeah, help help with, like, just the fine lines and the wrinkles side of things. But, yeah, I mean, it's still a good start for people. Yeah. Yeah. And and also the the the but the current the the the the current problem is that, a lot of people use this injection for for the the the collagen and also for, like, the the, like, high hydro. Hydro Casa boom? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And, and that is, like, you see a lot of, like, the pillow pillow pit pillow face. It's quite scary. So Mhmm. We want to put that, and we want to create something that's different. So this so so this in the reverse is, like, using the microRNA, to directly reprogram the senescence cells back into the younger functional cells. Actually, I would like to show you some photos. It's it's very interesting. What what else is like brewing in the Chinese longevity space? Because, it's a bit it a bit of a, you know, black box for a western, audience. But, yeah, what what else is like? You know, gene therapy, there's a lot a lot of talk about that. That's also, like, quite popular in in there. Yeah. So Chinese, the China's longevity science has made, like, rapid, progress in the last couple of years. Like, one striking example is the, naked mole rat. It is is that how you Mhmm. So which is we we which can live around, like, forty years. Right? And where a similar sized rodent, like, mice only live three to four years. So the recent work, trace part of the naked mole rat's longevity in, to a modified version of a c gas enzyme that enhance DNA repair instead of blocking them. When researchers introduced this naked mole rat, c gas, into fruit flies and mice, their lifespan and health span both increased. So another another landmark study from the Chinese Academy of Science shows showed that infusing aged monkeys with gene edited human derived progenitor cells can drive systemic, rejuvenation. So these universal progen progenitor cells appears, appear able to function across species and could lay the groundwork for future of the shelf antiaging cell therapy. So at the therapeutic strategy level, one major direction is a senescence target therapy like senescence, synecinelectric, like PCC one, that clears, that's all synomorphic. So but both have, but both have a limitation where there are many senescence cells aggressive like senolysis, can damage tissues. Right? And synomorphic reduce information, but may also dampen immune surveillance if used indefinitely. So that newer concept of synoreverse that uses microRNA, that directly, reprogram the senescent cell back to younger functional cell. So this is the so I would say the gene therapy and it's very close right now because it's it has already applied on monkey. This on monkey. So it's like one step away to human. So this is something that, we are where we are right now. Gotcha. Yeah. Yeah. There was the monkey study in China where they, engineered these stem cells. Yeah. I guess, well, they didn't they didn't report on how long did they live or we don't know how long was because here monkeys live significantly longer than mice, so it's not something that, we can just, see very fast compared to mice. But, yeah, I think the the idea of the technology is very interesting, yeah, that you go ahead genetically engineer some, stem cells or whatever, other type of cells to have at least, you know, they measure this biological age scores, which, you know, can be a bit, you know, inconclusive or we don't necessarily know what do they mean, or there's no evidence that they would actually extend lifespan. But, you know, the technology itself will, you know, certainly get better, and it's, something that will be needed to significantly, extend human lifespan and improve longevity. So, yeah, even just, you know, regular analytics, you know, they can only take you so far, to get you that a 150 and beyond. We will need something, more powerful, probably more related to gene editing, technologies. Yeah. I would say comprehensive. Right? Like, you need, like, full spot of treatment. But, also, the fundamental, which is what we are doing right now. Right? But, hopefully, like like, you we can we can, we can see I can I think we can see it in ten, twenty years, like, this is this is happening? Mhmm. Yeah. Well, hopefully, well, ten years probably is a bit too early. You know? I think in ten years, we'll be able to, you know, let's say, extend healthy healthy lifespan so that people will live healthily to to 80 and 90. But maybe in the next twenty five years, we'll, see some more significant dent in, in that actual lifespan. So beyond the beyond the maximal limit. That's my my opinion. And also really depending on the person's, like, mindset. Like Mhmm. A lot would choose even though they know that this is healthy for them, but they choose to do something else. Right? That is Yeah. That's absolutely That that is, like, the old they it will only work on people that that that that only have that mindset that wants to be healthy and, yeah, for for following the protocol. Mhmm. What what are what what is the next steps with PCC? So, and what is yeah, what what's gonna be, like, some of the future, I guess, modalities? Is it gonna stay as a supplement, or are you gonna do something else with it with this technology? With PCC one, first of all, our goal is to demote democratize longevity. So not to create a niche prescription drug. And, right now, production cost is quite high for, excuse me. Excuse me. For PCC one. And so we are working on the process optimization. Our expectation is that we can, significantly reduce the manufacturing cost over the next year or so, which will help us move forward, move toward a a product that an ordinary person and their pet can realistically afford. We do not we're not gonna plan to position PCC one as a conventional prescription medicine. Instead, we want to, become, like, scientifically rounded by a market driven longevity supplement. On top of the pure p c c one, we are already developing p c one based longevity formulation that combines, prasidin prasidin derivatives, peptides, and amino acids. In each in each my study, this upgraded formula, already showed, like, better performance than t c one law. So lifespan data from this experiment, should be completed next year. And after that, we will move to into, like, more extensive, like, safety testing. And at the same time, like, as I mentioned, we want to move this, we want to democratize, like, longevity. Like, we want to make it accessible. But we noticed that the the importance of the awareness of measurement, like, measuring, Like, even even a lot, like, health enthusiasts, they might follow the protocol, like, do like, having, like, good lifestyle, good diets, but they are not, like they they are not they are not measuring enough. And, I would say that it's because of the it's not it's not accessible in terms of, like, the cost or the convenience. So that, that's why we also develop, like, testing. Right. We also develop testing, which is and and and we open sourced it. So this is, like, the testing that we have we're testing it, but we are not selling them yet. We want everyone to be involved with a fraction of the cost. But with PCC one, it's just too expensive to make right now. So that but in future, we want this to be, as as cheap as, possible. So everyone should be, it should be accessible for everyone. Mhmm. Yeah. Absolutely. Well, yeah, definitely looking forward to the future advancements and the studies on PCC one and other things that you're working on. So, yeah, before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you, your work, or PCC one? Yes. Our website, longvbio.com. That is, like, the where where we put everything on. Mhmm. So even if you're if you're a lab or researchers, you can buy our compound library and you can do your own research. And and that is for the advancement of this field. And if you and and if you're a lab that wants to do, like, testing, then you can you can, we we have open source the the method. So you can you can actually you can we're not making money from the open source method. You can you can you can buy your own reagents and use the the machine that we mentioned. And then you can you can do the testing for SSP Mhmm. For semester because that is for advancement of this field because it's just not as accessible as other matters right now. So we want to make it, like, to to to to popularize this field. Yeah. Yeah. I'll I would I would definitely like to test it, yeah, the senescence markers myself. But it's accessible. Like Mhmm. Is it? What? Is is it accessible, like, very well? Well, I haven't found it I haven't found it, myself, but I I can I can do it if I if I really wanted to? But how much is that is that gonna cost though? Like, because, I know that in some, in in China that you you can and and I see that it's the cheapest in the in in in in the market, like, globally. It's around, like, few 100 US dollar, and, per marker. So it's very expensive. Right? And and that's the cheapest. And, yeah. So if you have find it, let me know. Yeah. Yeah. Sounds good. Well, yeah, it's been a great talking with you. And my last question is, what's this once one piece of advice or habit that you wish you adopted sooner? Sorry? What's this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you adopted sooner? Adapted sooner. Mhmm. Started doing sooner. Follow a routine, like sleeping, waking up, eating, and then stick with it. Don't break it. And, I would say that is, like, the the thing that I'll because it it because I I've I've I've done it. Because because others other other lifestyle, the the, the for for its, I will say, I don't know, like, sleeping and others, I I I I've I've I've I've I've I've I've I've I've I've I've I've I've I've I've I've I've I've I've I've I've I've I've I've I've I've I've I've I've Like, for example, like, you have, like, people that ask you out at nighttime to eat or something, but then it's not within the that time range. I would say that, it's better for you to stick to food. Right? And, that's for me for me. I think that, if you stick with something, then then it's it's it's it's gonna work much better for you. But you need sacrifice. So so that's good. Yeah. Yeah. That's That's the one thing. Yeah. Right. Yeah. That definitely agree that rhythms are quite your body runs on rhythms and works good on rhythms. Yeah. Well, it was great to talk with you, and, yeah, thanks for coming to the podcast. Thank you. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.