The message here is that the organism isn't trying to live as long as possible, but we're trying to live as long as possible. The more food it has, the more resources, the easier its life is, the better a job it would do. No. When life is easy, when you don't have to exercise, you don't have to work, when the temperature is just right, when you don't have any toxins in the environment, when you have plenty to eat, that's when life is shortest. Aging is terrible for fitness, yet aging seems to have been selected by evolution. It's not just an accident. Doctor Josh, welcome to the show. Thanks for having me. I'm delighted to be here. Isn't that what everybody says? Yeah. And, we just said that everyone is excited as well to have the guest on the podcast with an amazing guest every time, which is true in my opinion this time because, you've, written quite an interesting and, thought provoking book about aging and longevity, which we're gonna get into. But my first initial question would be, you know, you have a background in physics. You started off in physics. So what made you, I guess, pivot or get more interested in aging research? Well, I'll I'll comment first that all of the revolutionary changes come from somebody outside the science. And in particular, all of the big insights that have changed biology have come from people who aren't biologists coming into the field and say, you got that wrong. So I'm I'm in a good tradition without comparing myself to some of the real bright lights in the field. I mean, Schrodinger came in and predicted DNA in 1948 or something long before there was knowledge of what DNA was. Haldane. There are there are many good examples of people coming into physics and offering insights into biology. So, yes, I was a physicist before I was a biologist. It was 1996. I read an article in Scientific American by Weindrich describing caloric restriction experiments, and that this wasn't just an anomaly with mice. Every organism they tried it with, the less they feed them, the longer they live. And I thought, the message here is that the organism isn't trying to live as long as possible. If we're trying to live as long as possible, then the more food it has, the more resources, the easier its life is, the better a job it would do. No. When life is easy, when you don't have to exercise, you don't have to work, when the temperature is just right, when you don't have any toxins in the environment, when you have plenty to eat. That's when life is shortest. So whatever it is that's causes causing the limit of lifespan, it's not that the organism is trying to do its best, but there are just these things in its way. So that was the initial insight. Before I knew anything else, I had a sense aging is an inside job. 1996. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. You're describing these examples of calorie restriction that pretty universally across all species have been shown to extend lifespan. And, I think their longest life extension in history comes from calorie restriction a few decades ago, where it was up to, like, 65% life extension through calorie restriction in mice, which is kinda interesting, yeah, that you would predict that an abundance of resources would extend lifespan, but, it actually that mild restriction or, you know, let's say these positive stressors, which is in biology is called hormesis, that these minor stressors Yes. Yeah. So it's just a big example. And Caloric restriction is just one example of hormesis, and there are many others. Even radiation, yeah, I mean, you think of radiation as toxic. It, causes free radicals, kill cells. If anything should shorten lifespan as radiation, and it does if you if you get a high enough dose. But low dose radiation increases lifespan against all, all of our expectations. Yeah. And, you know, sunlight is a form of mild radiation that is healthy and it needed for optimal health in, in some amounts. But, you mentioned that aging or at least in your book, you, talk about how aging is more like a programmed into the organism that, or, you know, what is, like, evolutionarily? Why did we evolve to age? What is the reason, it happens in the first place? Well, there's the the paradox that I realized right away in 1990 so I didn't know anything about how evolutionists think. I didn't know about the selfish gene. I didn't know that there's no such thing as group selection. It's only individual selection. But in '96, I had this idea. I wrote it up, and remember there was no spam in 1996. There were people on listservs, and they were academic, and they expected that anybody who is coming to them on this listserv is sincere, and not trying to sell them something, not trying to scam them. The good old days on the Internet. So 1996, I wrote up the ideas that I just described to you that aging must be an inside job based on this. I sent it out to a list serve of several thousand, evolutionary biologists, and I got dozens of responses. Of course, you would you wouldn't have that experience today. People would just send you a message to the spam folder today. But in 1996, I got dozens of responses, and they were all telling me the same thing. No. You don't understand. It's not possible for evolution to positively select for a shorter lifespan. Fitness is about living a long time and having more offspring. That's what fitness is. We know this is a matter of theory, and it's called the selfish gene theory or neo Darwinism or sometimes called the new synthesis, although new means it was new in 1930. And they referred me to a book by George Williams, from 1965. They said, Adaptation and Natural Selection by George Williams. Read that, and you'll understand it all. Mhmm. Gotcha. Right. So you're referring to that if the goal the selfish selfish gene is a concept created by Richard Dawkins that your genes are the ones who are trying to keep themselves alive and all your behavior is motivated by that end or, like, you're basically being hijacked by your genes that your behavior is is directed to the end of the genes, you know, the goals of the genes. And, in that perspective, then, like, longevity would be also beneficial to the genes. That if you live longer, then that would be, you know, that directly positive for the genes as well to their survival. But, in your mind, it it doesn't really work out like that way. Well, we're we're still back in 1996. I didn't know any of this. Just a a slight footnote on what you said. The Selfish Gene book was written by Dawkins, but he was describing concepts that were not his. The concepts were from Ronald Fisher, r a Fisher, who really gave us the field of quantitative evolutionary theory in the work that he did in the nineteen twenties and thirties, combining statistical he he gave us a lot of the techniques that are used in modern statistical analysis. How do you report your experiments? A lot of that comes from Fisher. He was a remarkable mathematician, and he gave us the idea of the selfish gene, although he didn't use the word. It's all about how many copies of your genes are in the next generation. So a genetic variation that contributes to more copies of itself in the next generation has positive fitness and will continue to survive a genetic variation that causes less copies of itself in the next generation is bound to die out slowly, slowly or rapidly depending on how much the difference is. And that was the accepted definition of fitness. It has nothing to do with the group, what's good for the community, and that was very clear in George Williams' 1965 book. He said, look, you guys that are talking about group fitness and fitness is a property of the community, not just the individual, you're all you're all wet. You you don't understand the gift that Ronald Fisher has given us. He's given us a quantitative definition of fitness. The quantitative definition is, are there more copies of this gene in the next generation than they were in the last generation or less copies? That's what fitness is all about. And if you look with that narrow lens, which I call Darwin in a straight jacket, if you look with that narrow lens at aging, what do you see? You see, well, there's no way that having a shorter lifespan can contribute to more copies of your genes than the next generation. What do I mean no way? Well, there's an objection you might raise. Well, once you stop reproducing, then there's no motivation to keep you alive. So, yes, why do you stop reproducing is the question, not why do you have a curtailed lifespan. Why do you die? Yeah. It's true that if you stop reproducing, you might as well die. But, the big question is why is there menopause and the equivalent in males? Not not quite the equivalent, but the analog in males, we lose fertility over time as well. They're not as drastically or as suddenly as women do. Mhmm. You step back. It's not just humans. The prop the concept of menopause. For a long time, people wrote, oh, it's only in the higher animals that take care of their children and grandchildren that menopause can exist. But you look there it's throughout the kingdom of throughout the animal kingdom, many, many animals lose their fertility long before they die. Chickens are notorious for this. They stop laying eggs after a couple of years, but they can live on for many years after that. And the champions are worms. Worms are fertile for or lab worms, c elegans. Lab worms are fertile for two days, and they have lifespans of twenty days. So most of their life, they're they're infertile. A little more about that. The worms are hermaphrodites, which means they have both sperm and egg in the same worm. They're born with an ability to generate egg after egg after egg after egg, but they have a limited quantity of sperm. They're born with a limited quantity of sperm, and that's all they'll ever have. So they run out of sperm after two days, and that's why they can't continue to reproduce. They're going on they'll live another fifteen, twenty, twenty days after that. They can produce eggs, but the eggs are infertile because they don't have sperm for it. Now sperm is dirt cheap. It doesn't mean an egg takes metabolic resources to create an egg, but a sperm is just a tiny cell. It's a it's a half a cell, really. There's no reason those worms couldn't create more sperm if they wanted to. So the reproductive lifespan of a lab worm is clearly limited by internal programming. It has nothing to do with wearing out or or anything like that. It runs out of sperm because of the way it's programmed. Gotcha. Yeah. So the the argument would be would be that for the selfish genes, you would die after your reproductive window ends, but we see that you live longer than that. So there is another mechanism or some other process that is determining the maximum lifespan in an organism. In humans, you know, it's thought to be something like a 120, maybe even more than that, but most people obviously die much sooner than that. There's, like, extreme few people who reach that age or, you know, in history, there's only one person who reached over the age of 120. But, you know, what what is the reason we die then? What is your thoughts? You mentioned that it's something related to, like, this inbuilt mechanism that affects aging in humans and, our our lifespan. So what do you think is the driving force behind that, and what, you know, influences it? In one celled, protists, they run out of telomere, and that's their lifespan. In worms, it's a little more complicated than that. They run out of sperm, and that's the end of their fertile lifespan. Humans are much more complicated than that, and there are it's multi causal. It's still programmed, but there are there are multiple causes. It's mediated by epigenetics, which means that our gene expression changes. As we reach fertility, we turn on sex hormones. And as we reach the end of our growth cycle, we turn off the growth hormones. When we get to age 40, 50, and more towards 60, we are turning more on mixtures of hormones and enzymes that are actually destroying us. The best known example is inflammation. There are cytokines that, determine the level of inflammation globally through the body, and more and more inflammation is turned on as we get older. And the inflammation is the primary driver of the three biggest diseases of old age, heart disease, stroke. I could put those together. Cardiovascular disease, cancer, and Alzheimer's disease are the the three biggest, causes of death from old age, and all of those are very tightly connected to inflammation. So just in increasing inflammation is a primary driver of aging, and that's programmed into our genes. You know, as as we get older, the epigenetics changes so that we turn on these cytokines that cause, inflammation to be ramped up. It's not that's not the only mechanism. Another one is apoptosis. Apoptosis is programmed cell death, and we need apoptosis. There are cells that are diseased, and they need to kill themselves. During development, it's not just that we grow cells wherever we need them. We grow cells for a a paw, and all the in between cells to make fingers commit suicide by apoptosis and disappear. So apoptosis is built into the development process. Apoptosis is the way we avoid cancer. Cancer cells remember detects that it is a cancer cell and it commits suicide via apoptosis. So I'm not against apoptosis. Apoptosis is really important. But as we get older, apoptosis is on a hair trigger, and we lose brain cells. Perfectly healthy brain cells are committing suicide every day. We lose muscle cells. It's called sarcopenia. And we're losing muscle mass because our muscle cells are bowing out because of apoptosis. So there's another way in which the programming, the genetic the epigenetic programming is causing us to, slowly destroy ourselves with age. Autoimmunity is another way that the body is destroying itself with age. Loss of telomeres is a fourth way that the the body destroys itself with age, and again it's completely avoidable. Every cell in your body is capable of making telomerase and having just as long a telomere as as it wants, but it doesn't do that. Instead, every time the cell divides, the telomere gets a little bit shorter until the cell goes into replicative senescence. It, it slows down, can't reproduce anymore, and actually becomes toxic to the rest of the cells when it becomes senescent with a a short telomere. Completely avoidable, but it's part of the aging program that, cells have a finite lifespan. Okay. Gotcha. So the idea of it being programmed into our genes, you know, a a good way to look at it would be that, you know, no matter how healthy someone is, at the age of 60, they're way less healthy and and, you know, more older aged than someone who is 20 years old. Even if their lifestyle was the same all throughout that time frame and they were, you know, super healthy, they're gonna be a 60 year old will always be unhealthier than a 20 year old with all things being equal due to the process of natural biological aging. That's that's not that's not quite true. I mean, certainly, there are 20 year olds that are in really bad shape. Today's 20 year old Yeah. I'm saying they're both already have diabetes because their our diets are so bad because of, the lifestyle that causes people to just stare at screens all day. There are plenty of really unhealthy 20 year olds out there today. I wouldn't say that every 20 year old is healthier than every 60 year old. But as a general rule, what you say is absolutely true. Yeah. I'm saying that, okay, if the same person, you know, they had the same lifestyle and the same, you know, they're they're the say let's say, in an impossible experiment with, people following the same lifestyle, then, yeah, like the 60 year old, because of the natural process of aging, there's something that just, you know, goes goes on during the decades of life that, despite how healthy you are with your lifestyle, you will see aging. You know? The healthiest people will still see aging, and they're gonna die at some point. Doesn't matter how healthy their lifestyle is. At least right now, we haven't found a solution to aging and the longevity. But the program close and I assume we'll get to that before this interview is over. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices, which are the Bond Charge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes. They do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin antiaging, hormone optimization, pain management, and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes, especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the Bond Charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most regular turbidizers don't have the right wavelengths of light, which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Bond Charge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research, and they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code SIIM, s I I m, for a 15% discount. Okay. Before we get to that, you know, how do we unprogram the aging? You know, I guess the question is if it's like like a program, then who programmed it? Like, why did the, you know, depends who what someone's, religion is as well. But let's say, how did the genes then choose to, start aging and why did, you know, it evolved through natural selection? So this takes me back to '90 1996 again, and, getting these messages from other from evolutionary biologists that said you've got to read George Williams's book, You Don't Understand How Evolution Works, and I did that. I read his book. I enrolled in I live near University of Pennsylvania. I live in Philadelphia. So I went to University of Pennsylvania and asked if I could audit some evolutionary biology courses. I did that for a year. I learned how evolutionists think. And at the end of that year, there was a little light that went off. And I said, I understand now. I understand the logic that makes them think that the selfish gene is the primary mechanism of evolution. I understand why they think that group selection, what's good for the community, is a very weak force compared to individual selection, what's best for the individual. I understood that, and yet I still had, on the other hand, this insight that aging is programmed. So I thought this is a really worthy subject to investigate. This is a real mystery. I understand evolutionary biologists. I understand why they believe this, and it's very convincing to me. And yet, here's the contradiction to that. The contradiction is that aging is terrible for fitness, and yet aging seems to have been selected by evolution. It's not just an accident. And that's a a mystery I reveled in for five years. Yeah. It was 2001 before the light went off, and I thought I had an answer to that question. And because I'm a physicist, I'm one of the skills I learned as a physicist is computer modeling. So I did all kinds of computer modeling of evolution and aging, and how could evolution select in one model after another. It failed. I I, you know, every few weeks, I would come up with an idea. Oh, maybe I'll put this into the model. Maybe I'll put that into the model. I came up with countless evolutionary models to try to, try to find some mechanism that I could model that would show evolution positively preferring a short lifespan to a long lifespan. And as I say, I did this for five years, and, really, I was still scratching my head at the end of five years. Mhmm. Yeah. I mean, there are, you know, cases from nature of extreme longevity, like, very long lifespans. And, you know, some people might say that certain species are also immortal, biologically immortal. So it is you know, there are examples from nature of natural selection natural selection, selecting for extremely long lifespans and possibly mortality already. So, maybe you can talk about the So, I mean, eventually, I'll get back to so what what did I find? What is the evolutionary model that successfully, evolves shorter lifespans and preference to longer lifespans? We'll we'll get to that. But you're asking now about species that have either very long lifespans or no limit on their lifespan at all. They just keep growing and becoming more fertile and less likely to die with each passing year. Sharks may be like that. We're not sure. But clams certainly seem to be the the best example among animals. And we're all familiar with the clams that we get for clam chowder, and they're a few years old, and they're this big. But clams can continue to grow. If nobody eats them, they grow bigger and bigger, and they produce huge numbers of eggs and just send them out into the ocean. And there are known giant clams, six feet across, weigh hundreds of pounds, and it's hard to kill at that point. They have no natural enemies when they're that big. They get more fertile. They're laying more eggs with each passing year, and they're harder to kill with each passing year. And as far as we know, there's no aging in clams. They just get bigger and more fertile with each passing year. So there's an example in the animal kingdom of, an animal that probably doesn't age. There there are others. Lobsters also seem to have this pattern. Turtles, there are some turtles that, keep growing and keep becoming more fertile. In the plant kingdom, it's actually much more prevalent. You find many many plants that have indefinite lifespans. The world champion is aspen trees. Aspen trees don't reproduce primarily by dropping seeds. They reproduce by spreading roots out and then the root will come up in another place. It's the same plant, but it produces another tree, Yeah. A 100 feet away. There are aspen groves that have been continuously alive from the same seed for forty thousand years. And as far as I know, those are the oldest living things, these aspen groves that are Yeah. Tens of thousands of years old. Yeah. Yeah. I think there are some species that also so, like, some hydra species go through some form of recycling Yeah. If not per se that they actually revert back to a younger age and start again from the beginning. Yeah. That's another really interesting exception to those who say aging is a physical phenomenon. It's wearing out. And because of the second law of thermodynamics, we all have to get old and die. And then you show them the hydra, which, as you say, when it's starved, it it just shrinks down, becomes smaller, and then it goes to its larval stage. And it goes practically all the way to, to the earliest larval stage coming out of the egg. And it starts life over again once it's once it's refed. It's it's not the only organism. The hydras let's see. The hydras have some ability to do that. The there's a jellyfish called turritopsis that can do that. There are beetles, carrion beetles, that can do that. Those are the three species that I know that are capable of reverting back to the larval stage, starting life anew. And as far as we can tell, they're they've got a second chance. They're young. They have the same lifespan that they would have had if they had been doing it the first time instead of the third or fourth or tenth time. Right. Yeah. Yeah. That's kinda interesting that in that, I guess, environmental stress or this physiological stress, that's the signal for the for the hydra to go back to a youthful state. So what's the reason for that? Why does it happen in that scenario? Because, you know, that's the cue. What is why is it the cue? Well, when you're starving, you can't go on as you were before. I mean, that if your plan is to just make more copies of yourself and send them out into the world, you need a plan b. And most organisms don't have a plan b, but these few examples that we've, listed, they do have a plan b. And the plan b is to just shrink back, become young again, and, start life over if if I'm lucky enough to be refed. So there's a connected story to this. Right around I was when I was doing my work and getting into this field in the nineteen nineties, Walter Longo was doing his PhD at University of Southern California. He was a grad student, and he discovered that if you have a colony of yeast cells and they run out of food, the yeast cells are starving, that ninety five percent of the yeast cells will commit suicide, apoptosis again, and feed themselves to the remaining 5% to, increase their lifespan. So, woah. Well, selfish genes is impossible. That can't possibly be happening. If there were a gene to be in the 5% rather than the 95%, that's the gene that would take over. Everybody wants to be in the 5%. No one wants to be in the 95% turning myself into food for their others. So whatever genetically is causing that, there's a strong strong evolutionary pressure to be in the 5% and not the 95%. Valter Longo, go back to the lab and look again. This can't be true. And that's that's what he when he submitted his article, that's what they what he got. He said, we know as a matter of theory that what you're reporting can't possibly be true. And he's really smart and really stubborn and a really good experimentalist. So he answered their questions and resubmitted the article, and they sent them back to the lab again and again and again. And it was, I I think, 02/2001. It was right around then. He finally got his article through and it was published in Nature. By this time, it was bulletproof. Yes. 95% of the yeast cells are killing themselves. What they're doing looks a lot like apoptosis. It has all the biochemical signatures of apoptosis. They're killing themselves for the same They're killing themselves for the same for the sake of the 5%, and they're not genetically different from the 5%. Somehow, they're signaling to each other that some of us are gonna live and others are gonna die, and the ones that are gonna die do so willingly. Wow. Wow. So it's they collectively decide which one lives or which one doesn't. So there's, I mean, there's the first example of extreme group selection. What they're doing is falling on their sword. It's the an extreme example about altruism, sacrificing my life, my reproductive potential. I have no evolutionary progeny of my own. I'm sacrificing everything for the sake of the community. Wow. Yeah. So that so then that's a hint towards why some species are dying in age. Yeah. Well, it's an extreme counterexample to the selfish gene idea Right. And to the paradigm put forth by r a Fisher back in the nineteen twenties and thirties. It can't be the whole story. Selfish genes, yeah, I mean, there's a role for selfish genes in evolution, but it can't be the whole story. Mhmm. Right. Does it apply to humans then as well? So in humans, obviously, you know, nearly half of our life, we, or at least the average person tends to not be able to reproduce. Women, you know, in in their middle age, they lose the ability to reproduce. Males can reproduce technically to the very end almost. But, so what what what why in humans then we die? Is it because of we become, I guess, slower or in a hunter gatherer setting where, like, becoming worse at gathering food and, worse at hunting, or what is the reason that in humans it happens, this kind of aging? So we're asking for the evolutionary mechanism, or we're asking about the metabolic mechanisms. The metabolic mechanisms, I I listed a a few that that and how they work through epigenetics. The evolution in animals is, I I think there's a common theme. But in humans, it becomes really complicated because we're smart enough to control who pre reproduces. We get together and decide who's gonna reproduce and who isn't, and we have economies that provide, more resources to some of us than others. You could argue that evolution just isn't working in humans in a sense of survival of the fittest. That that's that doesn't apply to humans anymore. We've taken charge of our own evolution. And to some extent, we've been doing that for thousands of years. So it becomes really complicated in humans. So with your permission, I'd go back to telling the story. Well, why do why do most animals, almost all animals why do almost all animals get old and die? And that comes to the answer that I finally came up with after five years of trying one, mathematical model after another. Yeah. You're gonna The the one that I came to is predator prey dynamics. Damon Centola was a grad student at the time, and I didn't take him seriously at first because he was a grad student. But he was the first person who clued me in. You know, predator play dynamics is really a powerful a revolutionary force. You should be looking at this. I later learned that Michael Gilpin had written a whole treatise on predator prey dynamics thirty years earlier. Twenty years earlier? The the mid nineteen seventies, he wrote a treatise called group selection in predator prey communities. So that was really the first person who discovered that predator prey dynamics is a really powerful evolutionary force. And what does it mean In one sentence, if you're a community of animals, you depend on a food supply, and there's no sense in reproducing faster than your food species is reproducing. If you reproduce faster than your food species, you're gonna eat up everything that's available and your children are gonna starve. There's no evolutionary payoff for reproducing faster than your food species reproduces. Eventually, we're all down to plants. I mean, plants is where all food energy comes from, and plants are limited by sunlight. They're not limited by, food or anything else in the environment. Some in some environments, they're limited by water. But most environments, they're limited by sunlight. So plants are always gonna reproduce at a rate that's determined by how much sun are they getting. And animals have to learn that you don't eat all the plants. If you eat all the plants, evolution punishes your children very rapidly. So so this is a an evolutionary force that's very powerful. It can work in one generation. It can wipe out all of your offspring. If your generation outgrows its food supply, if all the lions grow to the point where they can catch the gazelles, they the lions run faster than the gazelles. It's easy to catch a gazelle. You you eat all the gazelles, and then the lions have nothing to eat in the next generation. That's why lions are a little bit slower than gazelles. They can catch the gazelles that are older and ailing, and that's a perpetual food supply. The lions are always gonna be a small percentage compared to the gazelles. It would be a disaster if you had as many lions as gazelles out there. They would wipe out the gazelles, and then there would be no more lions. Yeah. So all animals have learned this. All animals have learned that the selfish gene doesn't work. You have to limit your reproduction. Wow. You have to keep your numbers in line so that you don't use up whatever food supply you depend on. And this is an evolutionary force that's just as fast as individual selection. It can compete successfully with individual selection. In order to keep the reproductive rate down and to keep numbers in check, you have both birth control and death control built into every animal species or almost all animal species. I I just told you that clamps may be an exception. Almost all animal species have birth control and death control built into their physiology so that they can never outgrow their food species. And as I said, evolution will very rapidly punish any species that, that tries to go against this. My favorite example is the Rocky Mountain Locust. There were plagues of locusts in America in the eighteen eighties, eighteen nineties, I think right through 1900 something. There were periodic plagues when locusts would just fill the skies. Laura Ingalls Wilder wrote about it graphically, as she experienced it when she was growing up. These clouds, miles and miles long, would come and descend on a neighborhood. They completely denude the trees. Everything green within, within this cloud would be turned into locust meat. And people would say it's disgusting. The whole ground is covered with locusts. You can't walk anywhere without stepping on them. If you think in terms of selfish genes, they were the ultimate, successful species. They're able to turn any green matter into more locust eggs, and they're extinct. There are no Rocky Mountain locusts left. Yeah. So if a if a species is too successful in, especially in the predator prey dynamics that they're too good of a predator, they're gonna kill all of their prey and that then they're gonna go extinct because they don't have any more food left. Bingo. So that's the key to understanding where senescence come from. It's the key to understanding why the selfish gene theory is only part of the story and why community selection is a powerful enough force to Gotcha. Compete with group birth individual selection. And in in the predator communities then, you end up, getting these genes that have aging built in it that they die so that the group could survive. So that there's, like, this self limitation in their genes that we don't want you to become too successful of a hunter because that would jeopardize the future success of the entire group because you're gonna kill all the prey animals. So you need to self nerf yourself that you need to be limited to a certain extent so that you would eventually die, and, that would enable the group to survive for longer through generations. Yes. That you've stated it very well. That that is my account of the evolutionary meaning of aging. That's, yeah, very interesting. And yet kind of becomes even more interesting with humans, as you said, that humans are already kind of outside of evolution, that we create our own evolution. Because in nature, it would, yeah, like, be that we hunt all the animals, we eat them, and then we die. But in modern society, we're able to, you know I mean, not even in modern society, for thousands of years, we've practiced agriculture. So we've cultivated animals for food for thousands of years and that kind of enables us to control our own food supply and manage it to the extent that we won't go extinct through starvation by hunting all the animals. So, I guess the question is then, why would humans still die? Like, we've been doing agriculture for thousands of years, so these genes are still in us, these, self limiting genes. We have the the self limiting genes left over from millions of years of evolution, not the few thousand years that humans have been doing this. But I'd say that humans are at a crisis point now. We've learned, not evolved. We've learned culturally to survive in many different environments. Almost all animals have some ecosystem that they're adapted to living in, and that's where they go. They they have a niche. Humans don't have a niche. We can go to Antarctica and import the food we need to live. We can live in the tropical jungles. We can bring scuba tanks and live under the water. We are not limited by environments, and that's why we've been so successful, and it's also potentially our downfall because, ultimately, we depend on ecosystems as well. We are slaughtering. We are destroying the ecosystems that, that human life and all life on earth depend on. I'd say that there's a dangerous idea that, oh, with artificial intelligence, with hydroponic plants, we don't need nature anymore. We could live in concrete cities and grow our food hydroponically. And, yeah, it'd be a a shame if nature disappeared, but, humans are gonna go on forever because we're smart enough, and that's really dangerous. It it ain't true. We still depend on ecosystems. We don't know how to create I mean, you'd a farm only works as a farm because there are bees that carry the, that that carry the pollen. It only works because there's topsoil that's been built up over, thousands of years and is rapidly degrading. It only works because there are bacteria in the soil that fix nitrogen from the air. It only works because there are fungi under the ground that are connecting these different plants and transporting nutrients between them. We think we could be into there are a lot of people, especially in the transhumanist community, in the most progressive, smartest communities of humans, we think we can outsmart nature. We don't need nature anymore. That's really dangerous way to think. We are still we don't understand how ecosystems work. We don't understand the vast interdependence. If we think we're gonna outgrow our ecosystem and live in a completely human created artificial world, we are in trouble. We're gonna kill ourselves. Right. Yeah. I mean, there is, yeah, huge, I guess, danger to ecological disasters and environmental disasters as well in the near future. But, yeah, but theoretically, it is solvable, right, that, you know, we we don't know yet how ecosystems work completely and how it's all interdependent. But I guess, theoretically, it is also possible to, you know, fix it. It's, I don't know what you mean by theoretically. We don't understand ecosystems well enough to know what the limit is or what is a sufficient ecosystem. And, you know, if you just have this 100 species, then you would have a self contained ecosystem, and you don't need any more than these one hundreds. We don't know if that's true. We don't know what the 100 species are. We don't know how they regulate each other. There was one experiment, count them one, in the early nineteen eighties, I think it was. There was Biosphere 2, a dome in Arizona where people said, alright. We're gonna try the space of Earth's idea. We're gonna seal off an environment with plenty of plants to produce the oxygen. We're gonna recycle our water so that, the water is purified by the ground and by the bacteria. It was the first attempt to create an artificial ecosystem that was self contained, had all the species and the balance of species so that it could support life within this dome. And they they were planning to go for several years to learn what they could learn about artificial ecosystems. Within two weeks, the oxygen had gone down so far and the carbon dioxide had gone up so far. They just broke the windows, and people broke them people broke the windows because they couldn't breathe anymore. It was a disaster. They couldn't grow their food. It the take home message from that experiment was that we don't nearly understand enough about ecosystems to create an artificial ecosystem, and we thought we did at that point. We thought, well, you know, it's plants and animals and bacteria, and we we thought we knew the general principles we could put together in artificial in ecosystem. And boy, were we wrong. Mhmm. I I I think with the biosphere too, the so it's a it's a very interesting story because it actually ties into the calorie restriction and aging, which I'll I'll I'll I'll do a little quick intro of that. But but I think they actually stayed there before. Do you wanna tell that story? Yeah. Yeah. So there was, yeah, this group of scientists and doctors, or the medical doctor was Roy Wolford, and he was very interested in calorie restriction extending lifespan in animals and humans. And, you know, they did grow their food, and I think they they stayed there for a bit longer than two weeks. They were probably, like, a year, two years or something. They just brought they just brought air in, but they thought, well, maybe otherwise, we can be self sustaining. Gotcha. Yeah. But but they they broke out because they were running on low on food, and Roy Walford was actually happy about it because he was able to do, like, a calorie restriction experiment in humans. He tracked all their biomarkers and body composition markers. They become, you know, look, very skinny and frail during that time because of the calorie restriction. Skinny but not frail. Mhmm. Or at least, you know, they lost a lot of weight. They lost a lot of weight, but they were stronger and healthier in every way. So I Yeah. I I'm not sure that that that Walford was interested in caloric restriction before that time. I think this might have been his introduction. He was hired as the doctor to be the doctor for the Biosphere two experiment. Mhmm. And it was what he learned from seeing people starving because they weren't producing enough calories to feed themselves and Yeah. Becoming more healthy as they became, less well nourished. That really surprised him, and he turned his career towards studying what is this? Why are people healthier when they have less to eat? Mhmm. Yeah. It's that's what he, was intending to do. And, some of the participants, yeah, broke out because of, I guess, worry that something would go wrong, which, is interesting. But, yeah, you know, he did find that, their biomarkers improved, although they lost a lot of weight than they had, like, lower body fat. And this is, yeah, what we talked earlier that calorie restriction has been seen to extend lifespan in virtually all species And healthspan. Yeah. Health span. And people who are calorically restricted, and people who both exercise and eat less are far healthier, not not just living longer as hanging on, but, more vigorous, mentally more acute. Not not more fertile, but in in other ways Yeah. We who are keeping ourselves, as slim as we can, maybe with intermittent fasting, which sort of tricks the body to turn on some of these starvation adaptations, maybe with eating less long term, maybe with it's blood sugar that triggers the the body's life shortening mechanisms through the the so here's a side story. The hormone insulin we think of is, well, that's what regulates blood sugar. And it that's true. That's what it does in humans. But insulin is very old. There's insulin in worms that don't have blood, don't have sugar. Insulin is the primary regulator of lifespan in worms, and the first genetic variants that were discovered to live much longer. And worms were the ones with the DAF two receptor, mutated. What is DAF two? It's the insulin receptor. So insulin is a life shortening hormone. If you can keep your insulin down, that's the way to, modestly extend your lifespan, certainly by by years, not decades. And you can't keep your insulin at zero because then you poison yourself with sugar. You become blind. And peripheral neuropathy in the fingers and toes, you don't wanna be a diabetic with no diet with no insulin at all. But if you can lower your insulin levels to the level that insulin was when you were a child, then it's a it's a way toward healthy life extension. Right. I guess the challenge is that pretty much all foods have some insulinogenic effects. Right. Maybe with the exception of if you eat, like, pure fat. But but even in large quantities, fat can raise insulin. So, I guess then the eating frequencies, you know, in in my opinion, the most effective way to control insulin levels is to do some form of time restricted eating because, the less frequently you eat, that's, like, a much more powerful way of keeping your fasting insulin lower than, you know, practicing some form of, you know, carbohydrate restriction, for example. I say it's individual. It depends on your metabolism, and it depends on what you can live with and what you what you feel good with. Experiment with different ways to keep your insulin down, and you'll find a diet and a schedule that works for you. And it doesn't have to be the same one that works for me. Yeah. What about the mTOR signaling? So that's another very known pathway of growth in the body, and it's often said to be, you know, life shortening. And it's less well understood. Well, I should say, I understand it less. I I know that rapamycin is the best single molecule that we have for extending lifespan in rodents. It's powerful. We don't know, we don't understand how it works. It it has something to do with growth. As you say, we need, we need mTOR to doing our growing phase. And as we cut down mTOR activity with rapamycin, it's one of the most powerful techniques we have for extending lifespan in rodents. I personally do a course of rapamycin once a year for a few weeks, and even then, it's it's intermittent. I I don't think daily rapamycin for the rest of your life is good for you, but I do think that you can extend lifespan with intermittent rapamycin, and the schedule is up for grabs. Nobody's done those experiments, certainly not in humans, to know what the optimum schedule or the prop optimum dosage. But, I'm I'm convinced enough that I I play with it, and I take rapamycin for a few weeks a year. Gotcha. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, we we could, you know, spend a lot of time talking about all these healthy lifestyle habits that everyone knows about exercise and that's what your listeners wanna hear, isn't it? Everyone wants to know, how can I live longer? Yeah. So, I mean, I've you know, I I have a lot of content about it already and other podcasts about it. But, I guess, you know, the bigger question is, is there a way to, you know, program our genes in a way that doesn't that, you know, maybe let's not talk about maybe mortality, but, you know, other ways to extend lifespan by few decades in every one or a 100 years or something like that. And, you know, is it actually something that we should do because of these selective pressures that you mentioned before? Would it be harmful in any way to the entire rule? I mean, it it's so to answer the second question first, it's absolutely turns on its head all of sociology, human relations, so how we live together in communities. If life span is doubled, say, through some intervention, Is this something that's available to everybody? Is it only the rich people that can have it? Or are leaders gonna end up, staying in office? I mean, whoever whoever it is, you want your leaders to turn over every few years. You don't want them to have the power of a king where they're gonna be ruler of the of of a country, let alone the world for a hundred years. Mhmm. There are all kinds of issues that come with life extension. Again, good for the individual, problematic for the community. We'd certainly have to think more about birth control to keep our numbers in check so that we don't overwhelm the earth's ecosystems if we develop the capacity to extend our fertile lifespan. So, it's not an unthinkable that, people would have the capacity to keep reproducing for hundreds of years. Having a baby a year for several hundred years, you you overwhelm the capacity of the earth to support humans pretty quickly. Yeah. So so the sociological questions are certainly challenging, and we could talk about that forever. And the question is, well, are there such technologies? And my favorite candidate is exosomes. Is that the the story you wanna get into next? You know, yeah. Like, what what ways are so, like, science obviously is trying to figure it out. How do we extend lifespan with a doesn't matter if someone likes it or not, but the scientists will keep researching this and trying to figure out the solution. So, what are some hints that is it gene editing? Is it, you know, some, other therapeutics, regenerative medicine? Or Well, let me draw a distinction first between modest life extension by years or even a decade and radical life extension. We have an evolutionary program that assures that we're gonna die, but that program is flexible. And using hormesis, we can extend life by a few years, maybe ten or fifteen years within the range of flexibility that's already built in by evolution. So that's the low hanging fruit, and we're playing with that with caloric restriction, with rapamycin, with several small molecules that that we use. It's all, playing with the flexibility that evolution has already built in to the human lifespan. Is there a way to go beyond that? And, as you say, a hundred and twenty years, can we surpass that by just overriding the system? So that gets into well, there must be a clock that keeps track of how old you are. Can we reset the clock? Well, we don't know where the clock is. Maybe there are several clocks. Well, this information about how the body how old the body is is communicated to every cell in the body. Can we hack into the communication system? And there is where we've made very promising progress. Starting in, I think it was 2004, there were experiments coming out of Stanford where they sew one mouse neck into sew two mice together. If you sew an old mouse together with an old a young mouse so that they're sharing the same blood supply, the same blood through the old mouse and the young mouse, we see intriguing signs that the young mouse is getting older and the old mouse is getting younger. That's called heterochronic parabiosis. Heterochronic means young and old. Parabiosis is the experiment where you saw the two mice together. So that was the beginning of there's gotta be something in the blood that is communicating age information through the body. Can we hack into that system? Can we find what it is in the blood that's telling a cell behave like an old cell or behave like a young cell? Can we rewrite the age of the body not by hacking into the clock, but by hacking into the communication system by which the age information is sent through the body. So it was seven, eight years ago that Harold Catcher, a friend and colleague of mine, had an inspiration about that. What is it in the blood that's carrying this information? And he guessed it was exosomes. He found an entrepreneur in India who was willing to finance him with fluid. By today's budgets, it was a tiny amount of money, but it was enough to do a year's worth of experiments in Mumbai, taking the exosomes from young rats from and injecting them into the blood supply of old rats. What is an exosome? An exosome is a lipid nanoparticle, meaning it's a package of chemicals in a shell of, lipids, fats. It's tiny compared to a cell. It's small on this the size of a virus. And it contains DNA, RNA, little snippets of proteins, even sugars, many signal molecules are in these little nanoparticles that are being released by every cell in your body all the time. That just the the cell sends out through its cell wall these tiny particles, nanometers across that contain, hundreds of different kind of molecular species. We're learning in the last twenty years that this is a universal biological language. It's not just within the body, but it's outside the body as well. My favorite example, if an insect comes into a forest and it's the forest has never seen before, the first trees that experienced that insect will respond to it by altering their biochemistry to poison that kind of insect, keep it away, and will send out signals in the form of exosomes that other plants everywhere through the through the forest pick up these exosomes that are in the air and say, oh, there's a new insect in town. Here's what we can do to prepare for it. So it's not just within the body. It's, from body to body and across species. Different species pick up the same exosomes. It seems to be a universal language. And as I said, Harold Catcher had the idea, maybe it's exosomes that are carrying information about age. He did a series of experiments where he extracted exosomes from young rats, injected them into old rats, and the results were just remarkable. The rats lived, they they looked healthier. They acted healthier. There were stronger, more stamina on the exercise machines. They performed like young rats again in these mazes and, animal IQ tests. Their their skin was healthier. They were more active and more curious. You could see their activity in the cage. It's just so easy to tell a rat that's been rejuvenated from its cellmate that's the same age but hasn't had these injections. And, unfortunately, in his first experiment, he killed them all to determine what is going on with their biochemistry to, to do all kinds of measurements. He he sacrificed them all, so we didn't get to find out how long do they live. And that experiment really hasn't hasn't been done yet. What how much life extension can be achieved? The the old so far, this has been done. Following Harold Catcher, there were two other groups that did it. One was at the Schmidt Hart Institute in Los Angeles, the other is in Nanjing, China, the University of Nanjing. Those are the three labs that I know of that have been experimenting with exosomes rejuvenating rats. All of them report remarkable success, but so far, it's only a handful of rats. I think less than 30 rats altogether have been rejuvenated with exosomes. And to my knowledge, only eight have actually been left to live out their full full lifespan so that we can know how much longer they live. We're very much at the beginning stage. We don't know what the potential increase in lifespan is. It's not gonna be that easy. I mean, it's not like all of the eight rats just lived and lived and lived. One of them lived to twice the average lifespan of rats, and that was a record setting event. Others had lifespans that were extended modestly. But this is the first stage. You know, this is the first experiment. We don't know about dosage timing. We don't know what kinds of exosomes are most effective. I think this has tremendous potential to be perhaps radically extending lifespan of animals and translating into humans. But there's a lot of research that needs to be done. And for the last three years, every time I get invited to a conference, every time I have the ear of an entrepreneur or a venture capital group, I said, invest in exosomes. Exosomes are the key to life extension in the future. And to a man, they all say, well, how are we gonna make money out of it? Say, I don't know. I I'm a scientist. You're the entrepreneur. Is it there's no patentable material here. We're do we're gonna develop the technology, and then Google is gonna steal it and walk away with the with the profits. We're gonna do all the investment, and they're gonna make all the all the profits. And that's true. You know, I can't argue with that, but somebody's gotta gotta fund this research because it is the most promising research in the field of life extension. Mhmm. Right. Interesting. What about gene editing? That's also so theoretically, you would directly look at the genes that regulate aging and program them in a way that would either slow down the speed of aging or break the kind of a ceiling for, for lifespan. In theory, if you change the genes that cause aging, you can extend lifespan indefinitely. But in practice, I'm really not a fan of gene editing at all. Aging is programmed at the systems level, not at the cellular level. And we know that because if you put an old organ into a young body, the whole organ becomes young again. Somehow, it's getting signals from the blood that tells that, oh, I'm in a young body. I can be young again. You don't need to rewrite the genomics of every of every cell. You don't even need to rewrite the epigenomics. You just need to get the signaling right. Mhmm. Beyond that, we just don't know how to do it yet. We have CRISPR technology. CRISPR technology works well enough that you can see dramatic results in some of the cells in a cell line where you use CRISPR. But, there are so many off targets. CRISPR works most of the time, but sometimes it goes to the wrong place and it adds your gene in a place where it's doing more harm than good. We just don't have the technology to accurately enough edit every genome in every cell of your body. If we could, it probably would work, but we're decades away from doing that. And meanwhile, we have this signaling technology, which I think has promised to give you better results with less effort. Yeah. So would but I I I guess there are limitations to that signaling. Right? So, We don't know yet. We're just at the beginning. As I say, 30 rats, I and it may be 20 something rats. I I'm pretty sure it's not more than 30 rats in the whole world have ever been experimented on using exosome technology. I I mean, we we have a world of exploratory research to be done before, we'd know what the limits are of exosome rejuvenation. Yeah. That's interesting. Because I would imagine you're not gonna be able to turn a 80 year old to the same. I mean, maybe appearance is different, but, you know, would would you be able to, let's say, turn an 80 year old to a 20 year old? I think if if you look at the rats, that's exactly what they've done. And I'm optimistic that with maybe 50 to $100,000,000, a few years of animal experiments, it will be ready to try that in humans and see if it works. Mhmm. Yeah. That's kinda interesting. It's real age reversal. It's not just life extension. We've seen age reversal in these exosome experiments with rats, and we've only been doing it with a handful of rats so far. It's really time to extend those experiments, try lots of different things, and find out what are the limits, what can what can we do. Are there any other, areas or different types of technology that has potential? Well, as I say, there are lots of good technologies I can give you. I have a web website where I give list of supplements that I take, and then I recommend that you try agingadvice.org. Mhmm. So I I don't keep any secrets, but all of this is working within this, maybe, ten ten year flexibility. There's plasticity in the aging program in humans, and you can max out on that ten years. You can get your ten years of average life extension, And you can do that with known, exercise and supplement and diet routines. But for radical life extension, exosomes are the only technology that I know that's got promise in that direction. Gotcha. Yeah. I guess, we can start wrapping up slowly. Are there any is there anything else that we should cover? You've given me a lot of slack. I've covered a lot of territory. I'd I'm I'm happy if you are. Is there anything else you wanna ask? No. I mean, yeah, like, we covered so the, you know, the reasons theoretical reasons why we age, why why, like, in some species, it's not happening and why in some species it is. We talked about the signaling, what happens with aging. We talked a little bit about the possible options. I guess the question is, what are your predictions? Like, at because, you know, the the science and technology in this field are advancing. There's some people, like, Aubrey de Grey, saying that 2050, '45, or 2035, I'm not even sure exactly which year is exactly his prediction. But, you know, in the near future, some people say that there's gonna be this longevity escape velocity or, like, a singularity moment. What is your thoughts about that? Aubrey has a a different concept of aging. He's not embraced the idea I have that it's all about signaling, that you can really solve the problem with signaling. His paradigm I mean, he got into this work a few years before I did in the nineteen nineties, and he's been singing the same song ever since. There are things that go wrong with the body, and we can engineer solutions to that. And I've got a different paradigm. We don't need to engineer solutions. We just need to change the signaling environment in the body. If we can do that, the body will do the work for us. We don't know how to do all these repairs at a small level. We don't know how to edit our genes. We don't know how to, remove all the the waste products from the body. We don't know how to detox from the oxidative damage, but we do know how to change the signaling environment and hope that the body will respond by turning an old out an old animal in a young environment into a young animal again. We see promise with these rat experiments that that's possible. So so that's my hope. When it's gonna happen, it could happen in the next two years if somebody is willing to put a $100,000,000 into intense intensive experiments with rats. Just try every which way, which kind of exosomes, on what schedule, at what age do you start, at what age do you stop. It there's no guarantee that exosome rejuvenation will work. I think it's a good bet, but there's no guarantee. And if it doesn't work, I I don't have any predictions for what the next thing is that will work. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. Well, this has been very interesting and eye opening as well about, the group selection pressures for aging and longevity. Before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and your work? I have a website at agingadvice.org that has my advice for living a long time. I have a a blog at agingmattersblog.org, agingmattersblog.org, that I've been less active in lately, but there's a lot in fifteen years of history on that blog site. I've got a book called Cracking the Aging Code where you can learn most of what we talked about today. So with with those those three things. But I you know, I've I've I've got a lot of diversity in my, ideas. I've moved away in recent years from aging research, and I'm writing poetry. I'm doing research in other fields of science with with which I also think need a radical rewrite. And I have another blog called unauthorizedscience.org where you can see my other work unrelated to aging, unauthorizedscience.org. There it is. Mhmm. Yeah. We'll put the links in the show notes. My last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit you wish you adopted sooner? Experiment on yourself. Learn what works on you. What works for me not might not necessarily work for you. Exercise like a demon to the extent that you can stand it. And, my favorite supplement is NAC. Take NAC every day. Yeah. That's a good supplement. Well, yeah, it was great to talk with you, and, yeah, looking forward to your future work. Thanks. Thanks for reaching out to me. This has been a lot of fun. Thanks for being open to letting me, rant about all these topics that I'm passionate about. Yeah. Of course. My pleasure.