Alright. First question. If I do moderate intensity cardio for many hours in a row, do I risk increasing oxidative stress? Are there ways to counteract the negative effects? So any kind of exercise does increase inflammation and oxidative stress in the short term. During the exercise, yes, your body has, you know, higher blood pressure, higher blood sugar, higher amounts of inflammation. So if you just look at it in isolation, then you could say that exercise is harmful for you. But what's interesting is that after the fact, after you've stopped exercising, the, inflammation and oxidative stress are lower. So you're increasing your body's endogenous antioxidant capacity. You actually lower inflammation. That's why people who exercise regularly have lower inflammation as a baseline. They have lower resting heart rates, lower blood sugar as a baseline, lower blood pressure as a baseline. So the short term acute effect is actually beneficial in the long term that your body in the long term does experience improved health. Now other ways to counteract some of those negative side effects, you know, yes. First of all, don't overtrain. So if you overtrain, then you're increasing the likelihood of getting sick, getting other negative side effects, experiencing harmful effects in terms of body composition or mental health, etcetera. So overtraining obviously is not beneficial, but a moderate exercise, trying to progress in your training is generally, beneficial. Now overtraining does increase the risk of respiratory tract infections, so elite athletes tend to have higher risk of respiratory tract infections because of the increased risk because of the overtraining component, especially when combined with sleep deprivation or undernourishment, etcetera. So, if you are training a lot, then, counteracting the risk of respiratory tract infections can be done with a sauna. So there's a research that, people who take the sauna have lower risk of respiratory tract infections, they have better immune system functioning, they get sick less often, etcetera. So, taking a sauna after exercise, after any form of vigorous exercise especially can mitigate any potential risk, and it also promotes recovery. Saunas promote muscle repair, muscle recovery. They also lower inflammation, lower blood pressure in the long term, so it's a perfect combination. And there's quite interesting research that people who take the sauna while exercising, they see greater reduction in blood pressure than exercise alone. And the same with VO2max, if you do sauna while exercising, well, not in the exact moment that you're riding a bike or, doing some, kettlebells in the sauna, not like that, but if you, you know, exercise and you also take the sauna regularly then, you also see increased VO2 max gains, so the small cardio respiratory workout you get from the sauna contributes to increased VO2 max as well, as well as a lower resting blood pressure. So, yeah, it's the best combination. You exercise and you also take a sauna after the workout, it's the best, recovery tool, and it also lowers your risk of inflammation or increased risk of respiratory tract infections that can come from overtraining. Next question, have you followed any of Russell Reiter PhD research on melatonin? It's very interesting. He's 88 and researched melatonin since 1965. Yes, I am aware of that research and it's very interesting to me. I think this concept of megadosing melatonin for the sake of antiaging and other longevity benefits is very interesting for me. I've been a fan of melatonin myself for many years. I've tested mega doses. I've tested, ten milligrams. I've taken more than that as well. I haven't really tested the one hundred or two hundred milligram dose yet, but, you know, I'm definitely or probably gonna try it out in the near future. So unfortunately there's no actual clinical trials on this megadosing of melatonin but, people anecdotally have said that it, you know, has benefits for them but obviously it's very limited evidence, these self reported cases. But, generally, yeah, melatonin as an antioxidant, as an anti inflammatory hormone is, yeah, super interesting. I think, there is quite a lot of untapped potential for for, like, megadosing melatonin for just not sleep, but just overall metabolic health and maybe cardiovascular or brain health or other health benefits. Next question, could you compare the top antiaging supplement formulas like BLUEPRINT, NOVA score, or Do Not Age? Yeah. I have reviewed actually all three of them on my channel before. I've reviewed Blueprint, I've reviewed Nova Score, and I've reviewed Do Not Age as well. Now, yeah, Blueprint and Nova Score are somewhat similar. They're or Blueprint has a lot more products than Novas, but, generally, they're like a mix of ingredients. And the Do Not Age is different because they sell individual ingredients. They don't sell mixes. They sell just the single ingredients. So, obviously, there's they're completely different in terms of that. My review of Do Not Age was, that some of those ingredients are very good, very, research backed, like, you know, creatine, omega-3s, berberine, they have, glycine and NAC, a few other good supplements. Some of them might be a bit more limited, like Sert6 or or some other ones like calcium alpha ketoglutarate or resveratrol as well. But, you know, the ones that they do sell are quite high quality and third party tested, etcetera. Blueprint and Novoscore, so I made a review on Blueprint. My thoughts on BluePrint was that some of the ones are good. I like that the soft gel formula actually, that was the only one I would take from their stack, which had, like, astaxanthin and lutein and vitamin k two, etcetera. I wouldn't take their capsules, I wouldn't take their mix powder, and my overall rating was maybe, like, 3.8 or four, I think, out of five for the blueprint. So, yeah, that's my thoughts on blueprint pretty much, and the only one I would take is the soft gel. At Novo's core, I think Novo's de Novo's mix, the powder mix, is quite, good. I would I would consider it like a pretty solid stack. It's a kind of on the safer end of not having any unnecessary ingredients and not having any potential ingredients that could potentially cause some negative reactions to some individuals, so it's kind of like a safe bet. Yeah, but I do think that, you know, there's a lot of untapped potential in Novos as well, that they don't have ingredients that have a lot of research and potential additional benefits, so they're leaving a few ingredients on the table, in my opinion. If I were to stack them, you know, in terms of, like, a tier system, these three, then I think, you know, Novos is, better than Blueprint, in my opinion, but, you know, during that age it's a different league in terms that they sell only individual ingredients, so they don't sell mixed powders, so yeah, it's kind of a pros and cons. But I am actually coming out with my own mix as well in the near future, next year, and, yeah, I'm just formulating it based on what I would take and what I will take myself and what, the all of the ingredients that have evidence and in their optimal doses. So both the blueprint and Nomos Cordae tend to miss on some of the optimal doses. But, you know, it can be hard because, or it's self explanatory because it can be hard to fit all the ingredients into the mix, but, what I've done actually, achieved that. So, yeah, it has the optimal doses and minimalistic setup. So, yeah, you don't have to start taking twenty pills a day or thirty pills a day like you would do with maybe some individual ingredients. Next question. Even though you share a lot of what you do, what are the things that you do directly or that might contribute indirectly to your health that you tend to not mention? The things that give you the extra one to five percent of longevity and health benefits based on your subjective opinion. Yeah. Well, I've always, thought that one of the biggest contributors to my personal health has been innovative fasting, so the research about innovative fasting is that, you know, it does help with weight loss, but it's not superior to regular calorie restriction, and when it comes to longevity then we, you know, can't say if it's gonna make you live longer or something like that. I personally think that, it at least it certainly helps me to maintain very optimal body composition year round without any effort. So I just skip a few meals, eat in a smaller window and, it just makes it easier to stick to a diet. You know, there's some other longevity pathways that get activated with intermittent fasting such as this AMPK and autophagy and FOXO3 etcetera but we don't know whether or not it will actually contribute to a maximum lifespan in humans. But personally I do think that I'm kind of biased towards thinking that it does, at least for me. Obviously can also improve lipids and, blood pressure and HRV and blood sugar and all these other biomarkers that can correlate to health span and longevity so that's my opinion. And I've been doing aerobic fasting for, you know, over ten years by now, so, it's always been my go to just because I like it. What other things I think have played a big role is, I have a very strong immune system. For some reason, you know, I never really get sick. I, if I do get sick, then I recover super fast, and I don't get severely sick ever. I, lived in a molded house for two decades without any symptoms, and, yeah, I can, you know, be exposed to a lot of pathogens or viruses and mold and those kind of things without even getting sick, so, you know, there is I have a strong immune system and the reason I think I have it is because I grew up in the countryside, I played in the dirt, I ate the dirt probably, you know, I grew up with animals, farm animals, touching the animals, getting exposed to a lot of different bacteria and microbes, so that builds a strong immune system. I ate raw milk when I was a kid. I, you know, was just in a natural environment with a lot of natural bacteria and microbes that does contribute to a a stronger immune system and, you know, in what I see online today is quite strange because there's a lot of people who suffer I have this food sensitivity, I'm allergic to that etc etc, like I'm allergic to nothing, I can eat anything, I have perfect digestion. I have, you know, good skin health. I don't get any reactions or rashes or acne. I've never had that. So I think the reason is because I grew up with a lot of animals, a lot of dirt, a lot of soil, a lot of pollen from the whatever air breathing in, you know, we had surrounded we were surrounded by wheat fields and some other grain fields. So when they're harvesting, then there's a lot of the grain flowing everywhere. So I probably just developed a strong immune system while exposed to these kind of things. And there is research that, you know, you can improve certain allergies and sensitivities if you're microdosed or, exposed to them in small amounts. But as a kid, that's where your immune system develops the most. You when you're exposed to these things in small amounts, as a kid, you just develop a very strong immune system or a very, like, a diverse immune system able to tolerate a lot of different, you know, environmental microbes and bacteria. Now if I were to move to Thailand or some Australia or Africa then, yeah, I've never been exposed to those kind of bacteria there, though, so then maybe I would get sick. But in my home setting in here in this Nordic Europe, I, yeah, don't get sick at all. So getting exposed to a lot of natural bacteria. As a kid, obviously, you can't do it retrospectively, but you can at least do that for your for your own kids. Don't grow, kids in, like, a sterilized environment exposed to, microplastics and, household chemicals only, you wanna expose them to the dirt and, live animals, etcetera, like a dog and cat and cows and pigs and chicken, etcetera. So I think that those are the two things that have played a huge impact on, my own health, I think. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices which are the Boncharge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes. They do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin antiaging, hormone optimization, pain management, and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes, especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the bond charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most regular Therapeuticers don't have the right wavelengths of light, which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Bond Charge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research, and they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code SIIM, S I I M, for a 15% discount. Your latest YouTube video on circadian rhythm as the next likely age marker was very insightful. Can you give a protocol for those who work nights? So yeah, that's an unfortunate situation and you know, if you can't change the job, then, you can still make it work. So if you're otherwise healthy, you're in good body composition, you eat a good diet, you sleep well otherwise, you exercise regularly otherwise, but the only thing bad in your life is, yeah, that you do night shift occasionally then that's not the end of the world. It's still better than being without night shift but being otherwise obese or not exercising etc. So even though you do night shift it's not going to completely eradicate other things that you do with your for your health. So you need to optimize just the other things, the other fundamentals. You know, get your body composition in check, don't become overweight and obese, do some exercise, you know, with cardio and weights, you know, don't necessarily do a lot of exercise in the night time or when you're about to do night shift don't like just wreck yourself at the gym before that, so try to exercise on the days that you're off from the work and otherwise just eat a healthy diet. When it comes to the night shift itself, then I would recommend not to eat during the night. Try to avoid eating during the nighttime. So even if you're awake, just don't eat massive meals or especially don't eat junk food during those times. You can mitigate a lot of the harm on your metabolism, hence your gator rhythms by just not eating during the night. And when you wake up or when you're about to, you know, go to bed in the morning after the night shift, then just try to get a good sleep, even even if it's going to make you wake up at 2PM in the afternoon then it's better to get the adequate sleep. And, you know, it depends if you have another shift the next day how long you should sleep. If you're gonna have another shift the next day then, yes, sleep as long as you want. If you don't have another shift, then maybe sleep restrict yourselves a little bit so that you can go to bed earlier the next day if you have an off day the following day. So, yeah, just try to optimize your otherwise lifestyle. And there are a few supplements as well that could help, you know, a lot of, glycine NAC, these antioxidants that support gliothone, that can help melatonin at the right time, as the exantin omega-3s, lutein, zeaxanthin, they can protect your eyes, shield your eyes against the blue light if you're, you know, obviously we kind of work on the blue light during the night, so, yeah, those are the ones I would take, and creatine after or during the sleep deprivation during the night shift, that can improve your cognition and reduce the sleep pressure. Next question, are there any supplements to take before the sauna to enhance its effects? Yes, there's called the Hubert protocol, Hubert protocol, and, it's just niacin with a sauna and niacin increases flushing, increases vasodilation, so it can enhance, sweating and potentially enhance, like, the microvascularization, etc. So, the Hubbard protocol was done to promote detoxification, so you sweat more out, but, you know, you can also otherwise use it for enhancing the cardiovascular benefits. So, yeah, niacin, like, a hundred, two hundred, three hundred milligrams of niacin before the sauna can enhance some of its effects. Now you could also take some binders if, you want to bind to some of the toxins that you excrete, but, you know, I don't I don't think it's inherently necessary because most of the detoxification effect from the sauna comes from sweating. So the if you take chlorella or charcoal, then, I mean, it binds to things in your gut, but it's not going to bind to you're still gonna sweat out the the the heavy metals or microplastics, etcetera. So niacin is probably, like, the best one that you could take and, potentially some other blood flow enhancing agents like, citrulline. Let's say you go to the gym, you take citrulline before the workout to increase blood flow, that also might promote some of the benefits from the sauna. Yeah. That's that would be the one I would take. Next question, do you think long term caffeine use ages the brain or can it be neutralized with proper recovery and nutrition? Well, if you look at observational data then, coffee consumption is associated with less brain aging and less risk lower risk of Alzheimer's, lower risk of cancers, lower risk of heart disease, lower risk of hypertension. So, you know, if caffeine were to be harmful for the brain then you wouldn't see that, right, the same with smoking. Smoking is seen to increase the risk of heart disease and it's seen to increase the risk of, cancers and Alzheimer's, etcetera, So if smoking were to be good for you, then, you wouldn't see that increased risk. So there are some things you can still take away from observational data because of the, you know, either the mismatch or the or the or the match between the observations and the mechanisms, so, there's no causal link between no causal evidence for smoking and heart disease, but because the association is so strong and we have a mechanism we can know that, the risk is potentially causal or it's very likely to be so. With caffeine, you know, you don't see increased risk of Alzheimer's or neurodegeneration. In fact, it's the opposite. So, yeah, I wouldn't say you know, the only way it could harm your brain aging is, if it disrupts your sleep. You're chronically sleep deprived because of caffeine or because it keeps you up at night. That's the only way it could do so. So, otherwise, you know, there's no, I mean, there might be some differences between energy drinks and coffee because the reason why coffee consumption might be associated with reduced risk of Alzheimer's and heart disease and cancer is because of the polyphenolic compounds. Maybe the caffeine doesn't have that big of a role. Maybe it's the polyphenolic compounds mostly in coffee and teas that explains that effect. In that case the energy drinks with isolated caffeine or pre workout supplements, maybe they might be harmful, but it's hard to say. There's at least there's no I haven't there's no, enough not enough data for the energy drink side of things. We do have enough data for the coffee and the caffeine from coffee side of things, but, isolated caffeine, I haven't seen enough evidence yet. Next question, can you really repay sleep debt or is it permanent damage? Yes you can. There was actually a recent study where, this weekend catch up sleep was seen to lower markers of aging and, improve some other biomarkers as well. So, yes, you can repay some sleep debt, at least based on the evidence. So, like, if you let's say you sleep short during the weekdays, you sleep five, six hours, now it's obviously still going to have some long term damage because you can't fully repay it, but, you can mitigate some of the damage by sleeping a bit longer on the, weekends. So if you just sleep, let's say, two hours a night, then, yeah, you probably can't make up for it entirely. You can only make up maybe an extra one or two hours of lost sleep. But if yeah. But but also not chronically. If you always sleep only four hours a night, then probably you're not gonna be able to make up for it. If you sleep maybe a few nights or four hours or five hours, then, yes, you can make up for that. Maybe not a 100%, but the majority of it. Next question, what do you think of urolithin a? So I have a video about urolithin a, myopia specifically, which contains urolithin a, and, you know, my impression of it is that, it's very overhyped and overpriced. You know, you wouldn't be I don't I don't see a way how you could charge a $120 a month for a supplement that's going to increase leg torque, leg leg, like, strength and leg power slightly, something like 12% if I missed if I remember correctly, because, yeah, the data they showed didn't improve, upper body strength, it didn't improve endurance, and it didn't improve body composition. The only thing was increased leg torque slightly, so paying $120 a month for that is, you know, not worth it in my opinion. Now obviously there's some speculative data about urolithin A and animal research that it might have some longevity benefits, that helps to stimulate mitophagy, that clears out old mitochondria, but it's, you know, certainly not the only thing that can do that. There's, many other compounds that also stimulate mitophagy and, you know, exercise itself does that as well, so, even if you just exercised, maybe add additional zone two cardio or some extra exercise, you could probably get the same benefits, compared to taking the urethane a and the money you spend on urethane a could be spent much better on some other supplements. You know, I would much rather take asexanthin, omega-3s, glycine, melatonin or taurine, they have a lot more evidence than uranethrin A at the moment. And, asexanthin and taurine and glycine, they also seem to extend lifespan in animals, So uranethin A doesn't have a monopoly on the life extension either, so there's many other, much cheaper supplements that have been seen to extend lifespan as well and they have a ton more clinical data in humans showing various benefits for skin, metabolic health, exercise performance, etcetera. And the reason I think urothelin aid or mitochondria specifically is so expensive is because it's patented. It's, patented a compound and it costs $120 a month because they have the monopoly on it, so it's kind of like a supplemental mini pharma situation, whereas aaxanthin, taurine, melatonin, omega threes, lutein, zeaxanthin, etcetera, they're not patented, they're just generic supplements and, they're 10 times, cheaper. Are the people who are doing too much longevity stuff fasting, cold plunges, snacks, etcetera and actually accelerating aging? Well, certainly, yeah, you can do too much. Too much of anything can be harmful. Overtraining is harmful. Getting hypothyroid because of excess calorie restriction and excess excess fasting is harmful. Too much cold exposure is harm. Too much sauna can be harmful. So, obviously, everything has the right dose. Oxygen, you need oxygen to live, but, you know, excess oxygen is harmful, you can die. Same with water, same with food, you know, everything has a sweet spot. And I think, probably the mindset in longevity space comes from, you know, a lot of, let's say, tech bros or crypto bros as well. They if they get into longevity then, you know, in that field just doing more gets you better results. In in in business, doing more gets you better results and just grinding through gets you better results in business in most cases. But in health it's not always the case. In health there's, the hormetic sweet spot that gives you the best results. Not too much, not too little, just the right amount. Because in health, if you do more, if you add stacking things up, then you potentially will harm the body. So how much would be too much depends a lot on the individual. Some people can tolerate a lot of stress and, it's not going to be harmful for them at all whereas others have a lower stress resilience, they have a weaker immune system or, you know, just poor metabolic health for fitness. So it all depends on the individual of how much is too much. But even then, the, you know, most resistant, the most strongest of people will they can still experience harmful effects if, you do too much. So what are some signs you need to look out for, you know, with, exercises that if you're always sick, you're not progressing in your training, you're keeping the same level all the time, or you're getting some joint pain and, you know, kind of just injuries then, that can be a sign of too much. When it comes to saunas, too much can be you're losing a lot of electrolytes, you're getting cramps, you're just sleep sleep begins to suffer as well, your, just, skin you you become very dehydrated, I mean, those things, can be happening with too much sauna, too much cold usually goes along the lines of, your thyroid begins to suffer. You, just feel cold all the time despite, getting out of the cold. So all those things can be from excess cold and, you know, pain sensitivity and those things as well. Brittle nails, brittle hair, kind of this, flaky skin or something like that can be a sign of lower thyroid, which can also come from too low calorie intake, protein restriction, too much fasting, etcetera. So, obviously, there are a lot of signs that you can you can experience when you're doing too much. But, obviously, the inadequate side of things can be equally as bad. If you're not doing any form of exercise, you're just eating whatever, etcetera, you're not getting any of these beneficial stressors, then, you know, your body resilience will also be somewhat weaker. So you do need some moderate amounts of, physical movement and activity, moderate amounts of, dietary restriction, moderate amounts of, let's say cold or heat exposure as well. Ideally, it's not I don't think the cold and heat are somewhat, like, mandatory, but, you know, at least some form of a physical movement. If you stop moving, you stop doing physical activity, then, you know, especially after the age of 50, then your physical functions kinda drop off a cliff, especially after if you've not maintained physical activity. So, yeah, obviously, too much can be too much with accelerated aging in depends on how far are you taking it. And, because, you know, arguably calorie restriction is one of those things that has been seen to extend lifespan in animals most consistently, you know, yeah it's not a pretty life, it's not an enjoyable life, but maybe it will still extend your lifespan. But in humans, obviously, you need to take into account the risk of, you know, frailty and, other infections. The calorie restriction studies are done in a more isolated environment, so mice aren't going to these mice or these, other life forms, they're not exposed to external pathogens to just isolate the variables. So, in humans who are in a free world, you need a strong immune system, and if your calorie restriction too much, then, your immune system will be weaker. So there's a trade off you need to keep in mind. So they think, yeah, probably excess calorie restriction is not the most optimal for long term in humans, especially also when we consider the the association between muscle mass and bone density and longevity. Next question. Any tips how to avoid the wake up after four hours of sleep? I go to bed at 09:30PM, but get up around 3AM and can't get back to sleep. Yeah. So I did a video about it where I talked about glycine and, slow release melatonin and just, emptying your bladder before going to bed, etcetera. All those things can be a reason why you wake up. There's additional reasons why you might wake up. They can be stress related. They can be just a habitual. So one problem with sleep is that it's very habitual. If you're always waking up at 2AM or whatever the time is, even 5AM, then that's what your body will do. It just habituates to that, it develops a certain rhythm around that behavior. And if you even if you don't do it, like, super long, even if you do it for a few days or few few weeks, then, your body will quickly adapt to that new rhythm. So, whatever the the worst case thing to do is to just reinforce that pattern and reinforce that rhythm. So you need to just, even, like, try to force yourself just to stay in bed because chances are if you stay in bed for another five, ten, fifteen minutes, then chances are you're just gonna fall back asleep and you'll sleep another hour. That's at least what I've experienced myself in the past when I've might have woken up again, you know, again slightly earlier, 4AM, 5AM. Instead of getting up and, you know, going to work, I just force myself to stay in bed for another fifteen minutes. Maybe I listen to some music that usually helps me to fall back asleep. So, anything that gets you to stay in bed and get to fall back asleep, that can relearn this pattern that your body will, okay, it's 4AM, although I woke up, I'm gonna go back to sleep. That's what you need to, do. Another reason could be, blood sugar issues. So if your blood sugar goes low, your brain wakes you up, there's a common reason for that, and in the morning you've been fasting for already several hours, so your blood sugar could be low. Things like kiwis before bed or just just, even like MCT oil or something that has ketone bodies that if you lack metabolic flexibility that is. If you're otherwise healthy and you have good metabolic flexibility then you should be able to, tap into burning fat and ketones during your sleep even if you ate carbohydrates for dinner. But, people who have poorer metabolic flexibility, poor insulin sensitivity, poor metabolic health, then, they tend to struggle with that. That's, like, one hallmark of, poor metabolic flexibility, that not able to switch into ketosis during the night, which would happen naturally. So you can support that with maybe some MCT oil before bed. Or if you're semi metabolically flexible, then you can also take kiwis, for example. There's research that kiwis help with sleep duration and sleep quality, but it can probably also be some other, like, lower glycemic fruits or carbohydrates. Next question, how many milligrams of sodium do you consume each day? I assume it should be higher for people who work out and do the sauna. So personally, I don't quantify my sodium intake. I don't really actually salt my food either. I don't, drink electrolytes, at least not regularly. I might do it occasionally. And, you know, if I were to guess, then my sodium intake is probably maybe, yeah, something around two thousand five hundred milligrams a day because, yeah, I don't, like, salt my food. Yes, certain foods have salt. If my wife cooks, the food, she salts the food usually. I don't myself, I I don't know, I never got into, like, a salt salt thing or I'm not like a salt connoisseur or, gourmand, but, yeah, my salt intake is actually quite low compared to, you know, given the fact that I sauna quite often and I exercise regularly, and I think that I don't have any problems with muscle cramping or electrolyte imbalance because of, eating carbohydrates. So, eating carbohydrates, you release insulin and insulin is a hormone that also helps to maintain electrolytes and maintain hydration. So carbohydrate refers to hydration, so, with higher carbohydrate intake you're better hydrated in that sense thanks to insulin. You maintain electrolytes better, hold on to them. And, on a low carb diet, that's the opposite. You have lower insulin, you excrete more electrolytes, and thus you can experience more brain fog and more muscle cramping, etcetera. Over time, you might adapt to it, but, yeah, with a higher carbohydrate intake, I've noticed that I need less salt, less electrolytes, and, I never really got in I I never felt the need that I need to just add a ton of salt or electrolytes to my own water or, to my own foods. And if I were to guess, then maybe two thousand, two thousand five hundred milligrams, so definitely on the lower end of sodium because I just naturally don't salt it that much and the only sodium I get are from some some other foods that, you know, prepackaged or or my wife salts the food or something of a bad. I do like to consume some mineral waters every once in a while, like a carbonated nice mineral water. I do consume those occasionally, but not every day, you know, a few times a week. Next question, what's your take on using sleep supplements like magnesium, glycine or taurine nightly? Can they blunt natural sleep regulation long term? There's definitely no evidence that I'm aware of that magnesium would, or taurine or glycine would, blunt your natural sleep regulation or make you sleep worse if you stop taking them, that they definitely don't work like that. You know, magnesium mostly helps with sleep if you have low magnesium status and, it then helps with stress regulation or replenishes the magnesium status, which then supports your nervous system regulation, supports certain neurotransmitter production, etcetera, but, you know, it doesn't there's no negative feedback loop when it comes to sleep the same way it is with testosterone, for example. If someone were to inject testosterone, their natural testosterone would, stop because, there's a negative feedback loop, the brain detects that it doesn't need to increase natural testosterone production, it's not the same with magnesium or glycine or taurine because your body doesn't produce those things to begin with. Glycine makes in small amounts but, you know, your body doesn't make magnesium endogenously, so yeah, it's a different scenario. There's a lot of fear that melatonin supplementation would stop natural melatonin production, but, there's no evidence for that either and, you know, and it's also not applicable, this negative feedback loop, with melatonin because melatonin isn't a hormone that's always in your blood and and in your body such as, testosterone is. Yes, there is a circadian fluctuation in testosterone but, you know, there's always testosterone in your, in your bloodstream. With melatonin it's not really the case or at least it's, you know, there might be some minuscule amounts of melatonin in your blood but it's not like something that has a circadian rhythm similar to testosterone. Melatonin is mostly regulated by light cycles, maybe food intake, etc, so, it's not working the same way as testosterone. So, absence of blue and green light helps with melatonin production and, not eating increases also melatonin production in the gut, so, certain, you it's like infrared, right, infrared light radiation does that, as well, so there are many moments during the day where you can experience an increase in melatonin, so theoretically that will also suppress natural melatonin production at nighttime, but that's not the case. Even if you get exposed to sunlight during daytime, that helps with mitochondrial melatonin, it doesn't suppress your natural melatonin production at night. In fact, it actually enhances it and supports it. And, the studies that are out there about very large dose melatonin intake, fifty milligrams and above, they haven't seen suppression of natural melatonin production. So, yeah, definitely wouldn't worry. I think the bigger risk is psychological dependence. So if you always take melatonin for sleep you think that you need to take melatonin to fall asleep properly and as I just alluded earlier, it's sleep is very habitual and pattern, pattern oriented. It's very psychological. You, have a lot of psychological factors that influence how well you sleep, how long you sleep, even just like I mentioned earlier that if you always wake up at 4AM then that's what your body will do. It will wake you up at 4AM. If you rewire that pattern to wake up later then you will stick to that new pattern. And the same with melatonin. If you always take melatonin, you think you need to take melatonin to fall asleep then that's what's gonna happen. It's kind of like self placebo effect, you think you need it. But, there's no psycho no physiological, blunting of natural melatonin production, if that makes sense. Next question: how much longevity is just keeping inflammation low versus actively repairing cellular damage? So, yeah, that's an interesting question. Obviously, we don't have a solid answer to what drives aging and what is this, like, sole thing responsible for longevity. In humans it's quite complicated. There's a lot of psychological, physiological and environmental factors that determine how long someone will live. There's a luck involved, genetics is involved quite a lot. But, yeah, obviously inflammation is one of the hallmarks of aging and, I think I think it is pretty reasonable to say that high inflammation also drives aging, so people who have high inflammation chronically chronic inflammation because of mostly, let's say, obesity, poor metabolic health, diabetes, insulin resistance, sleep restriction, just environmental inflammatory factors like air pollution, heavy metals, all those things, all of those things will drive the aging process as well. So smoking causes a lot of inflammation and we can say pretty surely that smoking accelerates aging as well. And there is some evidence that with age you see an increase in inflammation, so the healthiest 80 year old, they can still have slightly higher inflammation compared to the healthiest 20 year old, because of the natural process of aging. I think it's, you know, not always. Of course, you can have 80 year olds who have low inflammation and 20 year olds with high inflammation, but with all things being equal, you would see that a 80 year old has worse gliothon status, worse melatonin levels, worse antioxidant efference and higher inflammation as a baseline. Is it the only thing that matters? No, there's, you know, many other factors that, drive aging and contribute to that keeping your inflammation low is one of the easiest things and, like, just a safe bet to do for your longevity, because, yeah, inflammation is driving all chronic diseases, it's associated with all chronic diseases and, you know, drives atherosclerosis, drives neurodegeneration, increases risk of cancer, shortens telomeres, all those things, so yeah, just keeping your inflammation as low as possible is one of the easiest things and safest things you can do to your longevity. You can measure it with CRP, keeping CRP low, keeping IL-six low, TNF alpha low and just having a healthy lifestyle, keeping your visceral fat low, keeping body composition normal, sleeping normally, etcetera. We're actively repairing cellular damage so that's, I think a bit harder problem. And, you know, DNA damage, cell senescence, all those things are also one of the hallmarks of aging, and, again, it's pretty reasonable to say that if you drive higher amounts of DNA damage, you know, you get you go to you get exposed to radiation in high amounts, you just get exposed to high amounts of, u u UV damage or just DNA damage in excessive amounts, you know, some toxins, etcetera, then, yes, it's reasonable to say that you also draw accelerated aging by doing that. So the short answer to that is, you know, you know, yes, you want to just minimize unnecessary damage and, supporting repairing the damage with your body's antioxidant defense and repair mechanisms, but, you know, even if you do that, even if you keep your inflammation as low as possible, even if you support all these repair pathways, I don't think it's enough to, you know, fully transform longevity to make people live decades longer. There's a lot more other things that we don't realize or don't understand yet. So there's a lot of, like, evolutionary programs, different genes, so, yeah, I think epigenetics is also quite influential. So it's not just inflammation. If you keep your inflammation low, you keep your DNA damage low, you'll still age because of, the natural process of the human body that's, you know, mostly genetic and, in some ways evolutionarily selected for and just part of the human physiology. And the last question is, do you fight the urge to binge or is your will good enough? Well personally I don't have any problems with food, I have a very healthy relationship with food, I don't, binge or I can't I don't and I never go into situation where I can't control my food intake or something like that. I generally just eat a healthy diet. If I wanna eat something unhealthier, I wanna have birthday cake or some pizza or something like that, then I do it. I don't see, like, a problem, with that. My health doesn't suffer because of that. I have, you know, good bio biomarkers. I sleep well. I have good body composition. I have good relationship with wood, and I do think that, you know, it's healthy to have certain, let's say, freedom about food intake as well, so you should never feel, I guess, anxious about food, like, oh my god, does this food have seed oils? Does it have gluten? Or, you know, something like that. Or, oh my god, this they only serve birthday cake here, I'm gonna binge or I'm not gonna eat anything or something like that. I think it's another healthy place to be mentally, and, I think it's important to have a relationship with food where you're confident in your own ability to even if you eat unhealthy food for a moment, you're confident in your ability that, you know, who cares, tomorrow I'll just be back on my healthy food and healthy diet, because you realize that even like a single cheat meal or a single bite even like a bite of unhealthy food is not going to have any long term negative effects on your health. As long as you don't yet go into some binge eating event then it's not gonna have long term negative side effects on your health. You know, you can eat a birthday cake, zero long term effects on your overall metabolic health, overall longevity. Now there might be some individuals who does have negative effects, especially certain people who have allergens towards certain foods, dairy, gluten, grains, whatever it is. If you have allergens to certain foods then, yes, it can it can be harmful. If you don't have allergens, you have good insulin sensitivity, good metabolic health, you're lean, then eating something unhealthy is not gonna be harmful. So you can think of it like a, you know, I guess, like, think of it the same way as, like, a bank account. If you have a ton of money in your bank account then buying, yeah, like, some sort of a luxury item or something that is practically useless, like, you don't need it but you just buy it because you like it, something collectible or whatever it is, then you have extra money in the bank account so you don't have to worry about it. If you're broke or if you have limited money then yes, you need to be more careful with how you spend the money and you can't spend money on unnecessary things. But if you have a lot of money, which in this context is you have very good metabolic health, you have very good body composition, you're otherwise healthy, then, there's no issues because you have extra reserve, extra bank account, extra, like, money in the bank. But, yeah, if you have worse metabolic health, you're already obese, you have poor relationship with food, etcetera, then in your case, yes, maybe eating the rest of the cake is not the most suitable thing, but ultimately you wanna end up in a situation where you can take a bite of the donut and not eat the rest of the donut. Because there's the risk that okay if someone eats a bite of something unhealthy, they eat a bite of a donut, they're gonna eat the entire thing, they're not gonna eat only the donut but they're also gonna eat eat seven other doughnuts, they're gonna go to McDonald's after that so that's the worst situation you wanna be in because you have a poor relationship with food and you're not able to control yourself once the gates open, so to say. The healthy relationship is that okay, I'm gonna eat this piece of whatever food, yeah, it tastes good, but it's not healthy for me, who cares, I'm gonna put it back and I'm able to go back to my routine after that. That's like the mental mastery and the relationship we want to have with food. Not being a 100% perfect, I don't think that's the healthiest mentally, and it's also not you're not actually disciplined. You're just it's easy to say no to the entire thing, it's much more harder to take a bite and put it back, so to say. That requires a lot more discipline. So yes, if you are struggling with metabolic health, say no to the entire thing because it's easier, but if you're otherwise healthy then you can eat it, you can take a bite, you can put it back, or whatever it is, you can eat more if you even like, but you know that the next day you go back on track. So I think that's in, in, like, the health and, nutrition space is what often gets forgotten about. So, yeah, I I have a very good relationship with food. In the past, it might have not been that case. In the past, I was more like I need to I'm gonna say no to the entire thing because it's easier. But now, you know, I can eat a piece of donut, put it back, and I have no issues with it, and my metabolic health has actually improved or, you know, it's not because of that, but because I've improved my metabolic health with an otherwise more balanced diet and more balanced workout routine I'm able to do that and because of improving the diversity in my diet I've improved my mental health and I've improved my metabolic health as well in the process. Whereas in the past if I said no, you know, one of the reasons I said no was because I was afraid it's gonna make me gain weight or it's gonna, you know, give me diabetes or something like that, which is obviously absurd, but, yeah, in the past saying no I was in a worse metabolic health than I am now. And taking a bite of the donut and putting it back or eating a piece of cake, doing it now hasn't degraded my metabolic health. I mean better metabolic health than I was in the past. And a better body composition as well. I'm lean year round without any problems, without counting calories, without, you know, feeling deprived. It's it's actually hard for me to gain body fat right now because I'm so satiated and, you know, I don't feel deprived of, anything, if that makes case, if that makes sense. So, yeah, I'm gonna wrap it up. If you have any other future questions, then, turn on the notifications and pay attention to, the community tab where I'll, you know, pop a post where you can ask the questions. Alright. Thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click a like and subscribe. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.