Methylene blue is a polarizing ingredient that's become quite popular recently. Just look at this Google trend. Methylene blue is searched for more than ever before. Some people say it's a miracle drug that's gonna cure infections, improve your energy and make you live longer. Whereas a lot of medical experts warn against it saying that it's a fish tank cleaner. Yes. Methylene blue is used in fish tank cleaners but it's also on the World Health Organization's list of essential medicines. In this video, I'm gonna make an unbiased overview of Methylene blue. I'm also gonna play clips from my podcast with doctor Scott Sher, who uses methylene blue in his practice. Methylene blue has got a name of well, actually called the magic bullet. And the reason for that is because you could give very high doses of methylene blue to somebody, and it would kill pathogens, but it would not kill normal cells. Methylene blue is a synthetic compound that was first used as a dye for clothes and other textiles. However, in 1891, a German physician, Paul Ehrlich, accidentally discovered that methylene blue helped to kill parasites including those responsible for malaria called plasmodium parasites. He conducted a clinical trial on two patients giving them methylene blue which cured their malaria with minimal side effects. Methylene blue wasn't adopted as an anti malaria treatment because we discovered much more potent and more effective drugs for that. Methylene blue's current primary medical role was discovered in the nineteen twenties when doctors found that methylene blue could reverse methemoglobinemia which is a condition where hemoglobin in red blood cells carry too little oxygen. This can turn your skin more blue, gray, or colorless because of the lack of oxygen. It wasn't initially known exactly what was happening there, but now we have a really good sense of what's happening inside the mitochondria when methylene blue is around. And the cool thing about it is it's something called the redox cycler. So redox cycler means that it can both donate and accept electrons. And our mitochondria, it requires electrons to create a proton gradient so that you can make ATP. Okay. And so what methylene blue can do is it can supply electrons to the electron transport chain and compensate for any damage that you might have there. Because of these antioxidant and anti inflammatory effects, there's a lot of experimental data from animals and cell studies where methylene blue provides neuroprotective, renal protective, hepatoprotective, and cardioprotective effects. Unfortunately, there are no human clinical trials on it right now, so we can't jump to any conclusions. There are clinical trials on COVID patients where methylene blue treatment significantly reduced respiratory distress and improved blood oxygen saturation levels which then resulted in decreased hospital stay and mortality. However, other clinical trials find that methylene blue wasn't seen to be more effective than placebo in clearing out the virus. So what it does if you take over about a milligram per kilogram or higher of methylene blue, what it does is increase the production in our cells of hydrogen peroxide. People get scared about this but our actually, our cells make hydrogen peroxide to kill bugs, to kill viruses, bacteria, fungus. It can kill bugs directly. It can kill or break up biofilms and at the same time, it's an immune system modulator as a result of increasing hydrogen peroxide. So at lower doses at like four, eight, sixteen milligrams, it's not so much an antimicrobial as it's a mitochondrial support, but at these higher doses, you get this anti infective capacity. One of the more practical aspects of methylene blue is its skin antiaging effects. Because methylene blue reduces inflammation and oxidative stress, it also protects the skin which is vulnerable to reactive oxygen species. Oxidative stress and inflammation are what break down skin collagen and reduce collagen synthesis. What's more, methylene blue protects the skin against UV radiation from the sun that causes skin aging. In addition to that, methylene blue has been seen to promote the growth of fibroblasts which are a type of skin cell and also support wound healing. In a reconstructed three d human skin model, methylene blue promoted wound healing and increased skin hydration and thickness of the dermis without safety concerns. Methylene blue also upregulated genes related to collagen and elastin synthesis. This sounds great and I'm excited for the clinical trials in the future. The only human studies I've found were on skin ulcers where the skin is infected with bacteria and fungus. Methylene blue is an antibacterial that can clean the wounds and also act as a photosensitizer to photodynamic therapy. Treating infected wounds with methylene blue photodynamic therapy has also been seen to help with wound healing. For skin condition specifically, methylene blue phototherapy has been used to treat acne, which is characterized by bacterial infections on the skin. In a 2023 study, methylene blue photodynamic therapy five times at one week intervals reduced acne lesions and sebum production without pain or adverse effects in twenty four patients with acne. Let's talk about the neuroprotective effects of methylene blue. The brain is an energy hungry machine and it has a ton of mitochondria to produce that energy. There are mouse studies where methylene blue helps to reduce the accumulation of toxic proteins and tangles in the brain that promote neurodegeneration. But are there any human clinical trials? There is a 2008 preliminary study showing that low dose methylene blue given to patients with mild to moderate Alzheimer symptoms saw an eighty one percent reduction in the rate of cognitive decline in fifty weeks. However, this study was done on a trademark product of methylene blue called Rember. Which is why you have to take these results with a massive grain of salt. In a phase two clinical trial, Rember was shown to improve cognition and cerebral blood flow in patients with mild to moderate Alzheimer's. So, overall it's quite compelling that methylene blue might have neuroprotective effects at least in terms of maintaining energy production in the brain under physical distress and neurodegenerative conditions which is what happens if you have Alzheimer's or even things like traumatic brain injury. Remember that methylene blue is a photosensitizer? Well, the same applies to the brain and researchers are looking into combining methylene blue with photobiomodulation, also called light therapy, to have therapeutic effects on the brain. Methylene blue is generally very safe and well tolerated at low doses. Low doses of methylene blue are very, very safe, hypertension, high blood pressure. So if you have high blood pressure, because the norepinephrine aspect of Methylene Blue, you might have a blood pressure rise. You have to be careful about that. The other thing about it being a monoamine oxidase inhibitor is that it increases serotonin and dopamine. So if you're on drugs that increase the amount of serotonin and dopamine around, you have to be careful. There have been some studies showing very high doses of methylene blue over one milligram per kilogram given IV along with SSRIs and these newer generation SNRIs or serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors may cause something called serotonin syndrome which is very, very dangerous and very rare. It can cause hemodynamic instability. Your blood pressure goes up, your heart rate goes crazy. But it's never been described with oral methylene blue excuse me, oral methylene blue before at any dose. Pregnant women, breast obviously gonna give you blue urine as well, so be aware of that. The other thing I wanna mention is that there is a hereditary disorder called G6PD deficiency, glucose six phosphate deficiency and this is when your red blood cells are more sensitive to stress and they can hemolyze. They can break open under stress. And so very high doses of methylene blue have been described as causing a hemolytic crisis or a red blood cell destruction crisis. This is again gonna be over one milligram per kilogram. It's only been described in IV methylene blue as well. But if you're taking high doses of methylene blue for long periods of time especially, you should definitely get a GCS PD test. It's very easy to get with your any provider really. I recently had a podcast with doctor Scott Sherr who has a lot of experience with Method in Blue. Check out that podcast next for more information on all the details. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.