Iron is an essential mineral that's needed for the production of hemoglobin in red blood cells which carries oxygen around the body. However, high iron levels are seem to be associated with increased risk of mortality and reduced lifespan. So why is something that's essential bad for your longevity? It comes down to the biphasic response curve where not enough of something is harmful, too much is harmful and just enough is good for you. Water, oxygen, food, sleep, they all follow that curve. There's actually a very interesting relationship between iron levels and longevity that I'm gonna discuss in this video. I'm gonna talk about how much iron is optimal and how to keep your iron levels normal for longevity. Let's start with the relationship between iron status and mortality. High iron status is associated with a higher risk of mortality in multiple different populations. Genetically high iron status has also been seen to be associated with a shorter lifespan based on this 2021 Mendelian randomization study. Every standard deviation increase in iron status was seen to shorten lifespan by zero point seven years and higher iron levels reduce the odds of reaching the top ten percent of lifespan. Basically, high iron status curbs the likelihood of reaching extreme longevity. Another 2020 Mendelian randomization study on over 1,000,000 people found that genetically high iron levels shortened lifespan. So there is evidence from the observational data, genetic studies as well as animal studies to suggest that iron in excess is bad for maximum longevity. The reason high iron levels are seen to shorten lifespan is because high iron increases the risk of heart disease first and foremost. Iron is a mineral that in excess can easily get oxidized which is why high amounts of iron increases the likelihood of endothelial dysfunction and plaque accumulation in the arteries. This is also one of the reasons it's thought that men get more heart disease and live shorter than women. Women up until menopause menstruate regularly. So they're losing excess iron every month. At the same time, iron restriction has been seen to extend lifespan in animal models by lowering oxidative stress and increasing autophagy. The process of removing cell debris. There's no evidence that restricting iron in humans would extend longevity but iron gilation in patients with iron overload increases their survival. What it does confirm is that very high iron levels can be harmful for you. And it can increase the risk of heart disease and liver disease specifically because that's where iron accumulates the most. One of the signs of iron accumulation are liver spots on your skin and face. These dark spots. These are actually lipofuscin which is an age related pigment that causes oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction. That's why lipofuscin fits into the hallmarks of aging. Lipofuscin is basically cellular junk and high iron levels increase lipofuscin accumulation through oxidative stress. Iron is still an essential nutrient that you need for tissue oxygenation. Low iron status and iron deficiency anemia are also associated with increased risk of mortality especially in people with cardiovascular complications. People who are most likely to die from iron deficiency are old people because their iron deficiency is usually because of overall malnutrition and not eating enough food. Young women can also be deficient in iron especially if they're menstruating regularly and they don't get enough iron from their food. But this doesn't appear to increase their risk of mortality that much because they're otherwise healthy and otherwise young. So if you were to play devil's advocate then you could even say that it's not necessarily the iron deficiency that is associated with increased mortality. It's the malnutrition that causes iron deficiency. And malnutrition also works hand in hand with other nutrient deficiencies as well as frailty and sarcopenia. Otherwise, you would see a lot of young women dropping dead from iron deficiency which clearly doesn't happen. This is what a 2024 study actually found. They looked at over five thousand patients around the age of 75 and saw that only in those with anemia was iron deficiency associated with increased mortality. In non anemic individuals, low iron wasn't seen to increase mortality risk. So what's the difference between anemia and iron deficiency? Iron deficiency refers to low blood iron status due to either not getting enough dietary iron or having some other malabsorption condition that results in lower iron absorption. It could also be because of menstruation or excessive bleeding for other reasons. Anemia is a condition of inadequate hemoglobin. The protein that carries oxygen around the body. In adult men, hemoglobin less than 13 grams per deciliter and in women less than 12 grams per deciliter is defined as anemia. Anemia can be because of iron deficiency which is when it's called iron deficiency anemia but it can also be because of other reasons such as autoimmunity or bone marrow disorders. So how much iron are we talking about? Like with other biomarkers, there's a sweet spot. Not too much, not too little, just enough. The normal reference range for iron is fifty to a hundred fifty micrograms per deciliter for males and thirty five to a hundred forty five micrograms per deciliter for females. Iron in that range would reduce the risk of iron becoming harmful. However, it's often seen that iron slightly on the lower end, not deficient but around sixty to ninety micrograms per deciliter is associated with the lowest mortality risk. Iron below 45 and above a hundred and forty five micrograms per deciliter is associated with increased risk of mortality. For hemoglobin, the normal range is 13.5 to 17.5 for men and 12 to 15.5 grams per deciliter for women. Below thirteen and twelve grams per deciliter is anemia and associated with increased mortality. A more optimal hemoglobin range is 14 to 16 grams per deciliter. There are also other biomarkers that relate to iron status such as transferrin saturation, ferritin and total iron binding capacity TIBC But I'm not going into the details in this video. The main thing is that too much iron is bad, not enough iron is bad and you wanna be in the sweet spot. If you wanna know about the details of our seven demarkers such as iron, ferritin, lipids, inflammation and hormones then check out my book the longevity leap. It's got 24 chapters on all aspects of longevity and it's based on over 8,000 scientific references. What I wanna do in the rest of this video is talk about how can you then achieve more optimal iron status. Iron can be low because of either not eating enough iron from food or having some malabsorption condition that reduces iron absorption. You can get iron from meat in the most bioavailable form as heme iron with an absorption rate of 15 to 35%. But, you could also get iron from leafy greens and other plants But, this iron is non heme with an absorption rate of one to 15%. So, you would need a lot more of the iron from plants which is why plant based diets can increase the risk of iron deficiency. That can be a good or bad thing depending on what your blood iron actually is. Vitamin c enhances iron absorption which can also be a good or bad thing depending on your iron status. If you're deficient in iron or you're eating a plant based diet then vitamin c from fruits and vegetables or supplements can increase iron absorption. Eating meat with vitamin c like oranges or orange juice could result in too much iron absorption but that depends on your blood iron status. Coffee and teas reduce iron absorption because they contain different compounds that bind to iron. That can be a good or bad thing depending on your iron status. If you are iron deficient then minimize the consumption of coffee and teas around meals to prevent iron chelation. If you are high in iron then drinking coffee with your meat for example, could be good to lower iron absorption. Hemoglobin status is influenced by other minerals as well, not just iron. Mostly, it's copper because caruloplasmin, which is a major copper carrying protein in the blood, increases iron absorption and hemoglobin production. Anemia could in fact be because of copper deficiency instead of iron because iron is extremely easy to get from food. You can get copper from foods like liver, oysters, clams, dark chocolate, and beans. So sometimes trying to get more iron isn't going to fix low hemoglobin. Sometimes you need more copper. In fact, it's more likely you need more copper rather than more iron. Overall the main message of this video is that too much of anything can be bad, even essential minerals. But if you're not getting enough of something that can also be equally as harmful. A lot of biomarkers nutrients and activities follow this similar biphasic response curve. Not too much, not too little, just enough. This biphasic response curve is a ubiquitous phenomenon in biology. By understanding this principle and doing thorough research on this biphasic response curve, I've managed to take my own health from our top 20% to top 1% of health. Check out my video about the things I changed to achieve that next.