My favorite though is tart cherry juice. Really seems to help me stay asleep. I have no problem going to sleep. My problem is I wake up in the middle of the night. But if I do a shot of tart cherry juice, I can sleep straight through the night. Alright, Dave. Nice to meet you in person. Yeah. You too. At this event together. And, yeah, like, the first video I made about you was, I think last year went through your entire routine you had on your website that you had been doing. So, yeah, we're gonna do, like, a little follow-up, like, what have you changed about your routine, ever since. Yeah. Cool. Yeah. Great. Yeah. And maybe we can start with, like, supplements. So that that was one of the first things, that you actually brought out when, we had a pot follow-up podcast about your routine that, I went through a lot of your supplements that you were taking a bunch back then. So, yeah, maybe have it changed anything about your supplement routine, right now? Well, I mean, it's funny. When you first did that podcast about my supplements, I thought, oh, man, this is gonna be a takedown. And I or did I thought for sure, like, oh, he's just gonna destroy me. But it was it was so cool the way you were very respectful and you went through each and every thing that I was taking and the quantities that I was taking them in. And you even, you know, offered some assistance, like, to help me make my protocol better, which I so appreciated. And so I I took a lot of notes as you were, you know, going through them all. And I I did. You actually, recommended I increase the doses of some things because of the studies showed that, you know, I can't even think of which ones in particular, but studies showed that a higher dose would be more appropriate. So Right. And I did that. And what well, to my surprise, I ended up having diarrhea. Okay. Which one was it? Like creatine or something? I know. I think it was, might have been glucosamine. I was probably taking too little of. And when I increased my dosage, my my gut just could not handle that. But it took me a while to figure out which one it was because when you're taking that many supplements and you just change one and all of a sudden you have a reaction, you don't know which like, what happened. Yeah. I mean, a lot of supplements, they can have, like, short term adaptations. So, like, creatine is a good example of that. You get nauseous, you get, some, loose stool, some headaches, something even that if you take it in the short term in a larger dose, but over time, your body kinda adapts to it. Yeah. Yeah. It would have been wiser for me to titrate my dose up slowly rather than just jump. Yeah. So Yeah. Well, I learn. I you know, I I gave you that, I guess, feedback mostly because of, you know, it's not that, you know, supplements aren't effective. You you can find a lot of, like, evidence for different supplements. It's just, like, at some point, you have to start worrying about your, like, budget. Absolutely. So it's, like, if you spend 100 and some of the supplements were quite, you know, $100 per month or something. Well, yeah. I had one. I was taking one, a telomerase active here, which was, like, $800. Oh, wow. You know, for but that was a a ninety day supply, but that was was so ridiculous. Yeah. Exactly. Then you need to find what are, like, the key ones that actually have been shown to have benefits and what give you, like, you know, the best bank fare back in terms of that. So maybe, you know, you can outline some of your, like, main supplements that you're, like, you pretty much have to take every day or you wanna take every day. Oh, gosh. I mean, there's really so many. To be honest, that's why I have them all on my website because I honestly don't memorize them all. Gotcha. So you have, like, some sort of a box or something that you take out or you just Oh, yeah. I have a a bin that I just keep underneath my bed Okay. Bumping the microphone. And I I have on the top of each bottle, I have a sticker with the number of pills in the bottle that I have to take out and put in my my case. So when I'm packaging them all, I'm not even looking at what I'm taking. I just know that I need to take three of these and put them in there and two of these and Gotcha. So that makes it brainless for me. Yeah. Do you like I guess my I can name a few. Like, do you take, like, creatine or anything? Oh, yeah. Okay. So powder wise, I I do take, you know, creatine. I take, oh, gosh. I mean, one of the one of the favorite things I like to take is nicotinamide riboside. Okay. Gotcha. I noticed that big time when I don't take it. Mhmm. So my must haves are, like, vitamin d and r, Right. Some of the basics to do, alpha ketoglutarate. Gosh. But, I mean, powder wise for, pre workout, post workout Mhmm. It's, oh, gosh. Well, I do l glutamine for the gut. Mhmm. Gotcha. With the creatine. I'm trying to picture all the bottles. Yeah. I mean, there's there's there can be a lot of them. It's a lot. Yeah. Do you take, like, any sleep supplements, magnesium, melatonin? Yeah. Before bed, I end up taking, l threonine. I take, gosh. Yeah. Magnesium threonine. My favorite, though, is tart cherry juice. Yeah. Really seems to help me stay asleep. I have no problem going to sleep. My problem is I wake up in the middle of the night, and then I can't go back to bed. But if I do a shot of tart cherry juice, I can sleep straight through the night. Mhmm. Now if I just do melatonin, it'll wake me up at 4AM, and then I'm wide awake, and I can't go back to sleep. Mhmm. And it might help the first night, but then the second night, no. I'm in wide awake from the start. Yeah. So but for some reason, tart cherry juice just seems to work. Yeah. Yeah. There is it has, like, a lot of melatonin and, it's powerful antioxidant. I think that your your gut produces melatonin, you know, with the tart cherry juice, so it helps to produce your own endogenous Yeah. Supply. Yeah. Yeah. Maybe let's move on with, like, a diet then. So, Well, I was gonna say one thing I have changed in my supplementation since we last talked was, I did particularly have my morning and evening supplements set up though that where I would do more, mTOR building things or, you know, mitochondrial enhancers in the morning, and I would do more autophagy activating things in the evening. Mhmm. Which, you know, it was okay. It I did that more for simplicity sake. Yeah. But now I'm trying to be more, just just more intentional about doing the autophagy activators only on weekends. Yeah. So I'm doing mTOR more, you know, five days on, and then the two days off is more the autophagy stuff. Yeah. The timing is also quite important that Yeah. If you have contradicting mechanisms from supplements, then you're like Exactly. Are they actually working? That's that that was a concern. Yeah. Yeah. And you you you're gonna update your, like, website with kind of the concurrent supplement stack and Been meaning to do that for weeks now, but, you know, things keep life keeps getting in the way. Yeah. Well, we'll put it in the show notes so people can see when it happens. Yeah. But, yeah, diet. So, have you changed anything about your diet? Well, this, this weekend, while we've been here at the conference, my diet has changed pretty much, pretty high. No. I mean, pretty much sticking to my diet, but one one thing I found by accident, at the last conference I was at, I took a, it's like a gut sensitivity test. Mhmm. I didn't think I needed it because I didn't realize I had any gut issues. But, the sensitivity test came back to tell me that I have some sensitivities, some foods that I eat often Right. Which was a big surprise to me. Mhmm. And then, of course, talking with their, their doctor, I realized that's a common thing for people that if you eat something often Yeah. You'll get a sensitivity to it. It's gonna show up cylinder. Yeah. So mushrooms was one thing that I eat, you know, pretty much every day. Right. And of my cherry nut, chia, you know, berry bowl, spice bowl, hemp was one seed that I have a sensitivity to. Right. Yeah. The thing with those tests can be that, you know, because you're eating them so often, it's gonna your immune system is, you know, quote, unquote triggered towards that food. And Exactly. It might not necessarily indicate actual allergy or sensitivity. It's like, yeah, what you're exposed to the most often. Yeah. So if you're not getting any symptoms, it's not The immune system starts to flare up a little bit about it. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, but it's not gonna be an issue, like, right? Right. If you if you don't actually you eat eggs, right, you feel fine, you don't have any bloating or gas or anything of that, then you're not really really sensitive, to it. And that was another thing I was surprised by because, casein was one that I'm totally fine with according to the sensitivity test. Mhmm. But if I do even the slightest bit of casein, I blow it up with gas, something fierce. Yeah. Yeah. So it's a difference between your gut microbiome being sensitive versus your immune system being sensitive. Yeah. Yeah. And but still kind of same meals, omnivore and, plants meets, fish? Yes. Yeah. Very much so. Any anything about the timing, like, timing schedule? No. I still like to eat my dinners about four Mhmm. 4PM if I can. Yeah. Because it helps my sleep scores much better if I'm not digesting while I'm trying to sleep. Yeah. Yeah. The same same, like, too much too close to bed Right. Dense to keep keep me up. Or, I mean, not keep me up, but it'll just, you know, have worse sleep score, even if I don't feel it, like, something there. So that's the plan. And, of course, life gets in the way because when you're out with friends and things, you don't always have control over when you get to eat. Yeah. Especially when you're at events like this. You just eat when you get the break to eat. So Yeah. Yeah. I got but, you know, you build resilience. So if you're healthy, you have resilient metabolism. You can do things, in a chaotic way Yeah. From time to time and then get and get away. I need foods that you're not usually eating, and your body's gonna, like, react super bad. Yeah. That's why I like to I I do low carb generally, but every so often, I like to just, like, throw heavy carbs at my body just to make sure that I'm metabolically flexible. Yeah. That I can handle the fats, so I can handle the carbs. Yeah. Yeah. Right. And with exercise, you know, you're in great shape as day in year round. Do you, like, change anything about your exercise? Are you doing still, like, p ninety x? I'm still doing the p ninety x, but because I have the the shoulder issues that I've done stem cells for, I'm it's being repaired. It's getting better. Yeah. But, I'm finding that in my rehab, I'm doing, my workouts now with lighter weight, but using, KAATSU bands. Mhmm. So the blood flow restriction bands. Yeah. And I I get a good pump from that. It makes the workout harder Right. With even lighter weight. Yeah. So the less less chance of getting injured. So it's a great thing for older people to work out with. So, you know, if you want to do Katsu bands, that would be the way to go. Yeah. If you're injured and you can't, like, do the full movement or the full weight, you put the Katsu bands and you get the same signal to your body with very light weights without damaging your joints even further. Yeah. And the funny thing is I can put them on and just go about my day, not even do a workout. Yeah. And my arms will just start getting this huge swell Yeah. To help. So it looks like I just did a massive workout when I'm just going about, you know, the kitchen washing dishes or something. Yeah. Yeah. That's why I usually use them as well. Like, I want a computer. I got just put them on, typing on a computer, and, it just works. I I was gonna say, you probably don't need them, though, because I've seen some of the superhuman workouts that you've done. It's it's funny. I I don't know if you guys know this, but Seem had originally suggested we do a workout together. Yeah. And I was game, but I was I was very intimidated because, you know, we were, like, thirty years younger than me. Yeah. So I'm like, oh, please don't hurt the old man. You know, that would be embarrassing, especially to break Dave Pascoe on a video. That was bad. Well, we would have done, like, your workout to adjust Yeah. The intensities, but, we'll do it another time before we I saw your, you know, your shorts of what you were your workouts, I'm like, holy crap. I'm glad I didn't take you on. That would have been embarrassing for me. Yeah. But, you know, you do cardio, you do interval training Yeah. Calisthenic. And run season starting up again. So I've got a half marathon coming on October, so I need to do that again. How many how many have you, like, run before? Oh, I've done maybe three full marathons and probably a dozen half marathons. Yeah. You change your, like, nutrition going up to it in some ways or? At first, I didn't. I didn't realize I needed to, and that was bad because, yeah, I would bonk pretty quickly. Right. I'm I'm very slender. Yeah. And so when I, when I don't bulk up on carbs, I I tend to burn muscle really quick. Mhmm. But even though even though I do, like, add more carbs back in on run season, I still tend to burn through muscle. Mhmm. So it's it's frustrating. Gotcha. You might need, like, some of these, anti catabolic, so HMB is a good one. I take that. Yeah. Yeah. HMB and maybe ketone bodies even can be anti catabolic. Yeah. I guess we we can wrap it up then. So, you're 62 now. Right? Yep. I'll be 63 in August. Yeah. So, what are your plans like for the future? Great question. Well, I'm thinking about starting a YouTube channel. Yeah. I know you've been encouraging me there. I really appreciate that. Still don't know what my exact niche is gonna be, but we'll see. Well, it's the Dave Pascos niche. So Yeah. Right. Just be me. No one can compete. Yeah. Yeah. Well, thanks for doing this, and, yeah, definitely looking forward to your YouTube channel. And it's been great hanging out with you this this weekend. I've had a blast. Yeah. It's been really, really fun. Yeah. Where can people find you on social media right now? Oh, dave dot passco at on Instagram and then, dave passco dot net on the web. Alright. Sounds good. We'll put the links in the show notes. And, yeah, thanks for watching. Thanks, everyone.