I recently came across a surprising statistic that Japanese people sleep on average three hundred and fifty two minutes or five point eight hours a night, yet there are people with the highest life expectancy of 85 twenty seven years. South Koreans also sleep on average six hours a night with a life expectancy of eighty four point five years. That's five years longer than people in other Western countries. I'm not saying that this is the reason why Japanese and Koreans live so long or that everyone literally sleeps six hours there. But it's just surprising given the fact how much people say that you need to sleep eight hours every night to be healthy. So I decided to dig up the research again and look at how much sleep do you actually need and how many hours of sleep is associated with the lowest mortality and the greatest longevity. The general recommendation for sleep is seven to eight hours for adults. However, many of the observational studies find that the lowest mortality risk is actually seen at seven hours per night. A 2016 meta analysis of 35 studies saw that seven hours per night was associated with the lowest mortality risk and sleeping less than six hours or more than eight hours was associated with increased risk. Interestingly, sleeping over eight hours is associated with a much higher risk than sleeping less than six hours. That's because people who sleep over eight hours usually have some sort of a disease or sickness like cancer or they're near their deathbed. Long sleep is associated with increased risk of diabetes, heart disease, and stroke. This is the reason why sleeping seven hours appears to be associated with the lowest mortality and why Japanese people can't get away with sleeping only six hours per night. Healthier people need less sleep and they're not going to sleep over eight hours on a regular basis. It might happen every once in a while but not regularly. Japanese people are extremely healthy compared to Americans or other Western Europeans. They have an obesity rate of only four point five percent compared to the forty percent of The USA. But this can't be the only reason why Japanese get away with less sleep because sleeping less than seven hours is actually associated with a higher risk of obesity and it coincides with a higher BMI at least in The United States. But even amongst the Japanese, sleeping less than seven hours is associated with a higher odds of obesity, but the same applies to sleeping over nine hours. Coming back to the sleep duration across countries, you can find Finland with four hundred and forty three minutes or seven point four hours of sleep per night, and their life expectancy is eighty one point two years, which is still quite high and one of the highest in European countries, but it's not as high as Japan. You also have Saudi Arabia with a sleep duration of three hundred and sixty two minutes or six hours, the same duration as Japan, but their life expectancy is seventy nine years, which is not very high and it's actually lower than The United States. Both Saudi Arabians and Finns are much unhealthier, and they have an unhealthier diet than Japanese people, and it shows. In Saudi Arabia, about twenty five percent of people are obese, whereas it's twenty six to thirty percent in Finland. So it might be that just a general healthier lifestyle and diet in Japan might reduce their total sleep demand or it makes up for their shorter sleep and still enables them to live significantly longer than other countries. They can sleep six hours without gaining weight or shortening their lifespan because of their healthy diet and healthy lifestyle. Because Japanese people, they're not massive exercises either. To be honest, that's the best advertisement I've seen about the importance of a healthy diet. Specifically, something similar that the Japanese and Koreans eat, which is very light, small portion sizes, lower in calories, not very fatty, not very sugary, lots of soups, etcetera. If you're eating junk food and highly processed food, your body experiences higher inflammation, which means you need to sleep more to fight that inflammation. It probably doesn't even have to be pure McDonald's or pastries. The traditional cuisine that's very rich and high calories such as in Saudi Arabia and Finland can also be harmful in that regard by increasing some inflammatory status. Obviously, these statistics are very complex and they don't apply to each individual specifically. So we can't make any conclusions about an individual specific health based on these statistics. But you can draw some rough conclusions about patterns of behavior and patterns of eating. Another big reason why Japan has a lower sleep duration is that Japanese people are older. The median age in Japan is 49.4 which means the average Japanese is nearly 50 years old due to their very low birth rates. Finland's median age is 43.2 which is six years younger. Younger people and children sleep quite long up to ten hours a night which would explain the reason the average sleep duration in Japan is low. There's not enough children who increase the average sleep duration of the country. Older people on the other hand sleep less. There's an age related decline in sleep duration and the amount of deep sleep that you're getting. This is generally not a healthy thing because you still need to sleep. But sleeping shorter doesn't appear to be a big problem for the Japanese people because they still live very long. One of the longest living people in the world. What I would still recommend for people over the age of 70 is to take larger doses of melatonin because natural melatonin production plummets with age. This would help with sleep and provide other anti inflammatory benefits. Japanese people are also nappers. One study found that twenty one point two percent of Japanese men and seventeen point one percent of Japanese women take a nap over four times a week. That's quite frequent. Spain which is known for taking afternoon siestas has only eighteen percent of people taking naps over four times a week. But Spain's average nighttime sleep duration is also six point nine hours, one hour longer than the Japanese. And Spain's life expectancy is 83.94, which is less than half a year shorter than Japan. So Japanese people taking very frequent naps probably helps to make up for their shorter sleep at nighttime. They still don't get eight hours of sleep during the day. They might sleep only twenty to thirty minutes. So they get on average six and a half hours of sleep during the twenty four hour period. There is compelling research that taking short naps in the afternoon is associated with better health outcomes and lower rates of mortality and heart disease. This 2025 study saw that taking short naps of less than thirty minutes was associated with the lowest mortality risk even when taken over three times per week. Taking long naps for over sixty minutes for over three days a week was associated with an increased mortality risk. Japanese have short power naps for twenty to thirty minutes even in public spaces and workplaces. So they sleep five point nine hours in the night and take a twenty to thirty minute nap at work. What the study also found was that people who engaged in more than a hundred and fifty minutes of physical activity per week, the sleep duration associated with the lowest mortality risk was seven hours, not eight hours. Among those not meeting the physical activity requirements, the sleep duration with the lowest mortality risk was between six point five to seven hours. So if you exercise, you might need a little bit more sleep to help your body to recover, and exercise also raises inflammation in the short term, which increases your sleep demand. I've noticed that myself whenever I don't exercise I sleep less and I feel very refreshed with only six hours of sleep. Whereas if I have a hard workout I need at least one hour more sleep to feel a 100% recovered. Alright. Let me give you a full breakdown of how much sleep would you actually need. The optimal sleep duration for the lowest mortality risk is seven hours. That's been consistently shown. You don't have to force yourself to sleep eight hours or more because the data doesn't support the idea that longer sleep is healthier. If you feel normal and recovered and your vital markers are good on less than seven hours, then don't freak out. But if you do feel tired with less sleep, then you need to sleep more. Just follow how you feel. If you exercise or have an unhealthier diet, you need more sleep to recover. You should still exercise obviously for the other benefits, but you should also eat a cleaner diet. Take short power naps for twenty to thirty minutes frequently. They're very healthy and appear to be associated with a lower risk of heart disease and death. Maintain sleep regularity to optimize the quality of your sleep. Going to bed around the same time is associated with better health and lower mortality. Overall, sleep is very important. You can't live without sleep, and sleeping only four hours a night is probably going to kill you faster. But you don't have to force yourself to sleep eight or nine hours a night. Seven hours appears to be already optimal. If you want to learn about how to fully optimize your sleep and recover faster then check out my full evidence based sleep routine next.