Magnesium is one of the most important minerals in your body, and it's involved in over 300 processes, starting with energy production and ending with brain function. Just look at this graph. But here's the problem. Most magnesium supplements don't actually reach the brain. This changed in 2010 when scientists at MIT created magnesium l threonate that could easily cross the blood brain barrier and it was seen to enhance learning and memory in rats. In mice with Alzheimer's disease, magnesium threonate has been seen to improve memory and reduce synaptic loss which could slow down neurodegeneration. That's cute. But what about humans? A 2022 randomized controlled trial in China saw that thirty days of supplementing with two grams of magnesium threonate per day improved cognitive performance and memory. The effects were more pronounced in older participants than younger ones. Another twenty fifteen clinical trial saw that magnesium threonate improved working memory and executive functioning in older people with cognitive impairment. So there are two clinical trials showing that magnesium m l threonate specifically has benefits in cognition and memory. But these results are seen in people with cognitive impairment or older individuals who tend to have worse cognition because of aging. Magnesium is super important for the brain as it regulates neurotransmitters and energy production. Your brain uses 20% of your total body energy, so you need a lot of energy for the brain. Usually, magnesium is attached to different salts like oxide, citrate, or sulfate. But these have quite bad bioavailability and poor absorption, and virtually none of them get into your brain. L threonate is a sugar acid, which is a metabolite of vitamin c, and it enhances magnesium's transportation across the blood brain barrier. The exact transporter isn't yet clear, but it's thought to be either the sodium dependent vitamin c transporters or monocarboxylate transporters, MCTs. An interesting element is the connection between your gut and the brain via the gut brain axis. Your gut microbiome influences the functioning of your brain and cognition. In mice with Alzheimer's disease, magnesium L threonate has been seen to modulate the gut microbiome and increase the amount of beneficial bacteria while reducing the harmful bacteria. As a result, the mice saw improved cognition and reduced inflammation, which is beneficial for treating neurodegeneration. Magnesium L threonate also improves sleep architecture because sleep is regulated by the brain. A 2024 randomized controlled trial saw that one gram of magnesium L threonate providing seventy five milligrams of elemental magnesium for twenty one days significantly improved sleep quality, especially deep and REM sleep, daytime alertness, mood, and cognitive readiness in adults with mild sleep disturbances. Another 2024 pilot study on healthy adults saw that combining eight hundred milligrams of tart cherry powder with eight hundred milligrams of magnesium threonate for thirty days improved sleep and cognition. They saw twenty five minutes longer sleep duration, fifteen minutes more deep sleep, and five minutes more REM sleep. It's a pilot study, but it's still very interesting. Tart cherry powder for the melatonin and threonate for the magnesium. Sleep is such an important aspect of overall health. And with age, you see a decline in both sleep quality and sleep duration. Because magnesium elthreonate is uniquely bioavailable to the brain and it supports brain synaptogenesis and creation of new connections, it might be possible to counteract brain aging. Magnesium has neuroprotective effects and this can protect against cognitive decline and brain aging. Magnesium deficiency in the brain specifically leads to inflammation and oxidative stress, which accelerates neurodegeneration and dementia. There's a u shaped relationship between serum magnesium levels and cognition, which means that low magnesium status less than 0.75 millimoles per liter, increases the risk of cognitive decline in dementia. The lowest risk is seen around zero point eighty five millimoles per liter. All magnesium types can raise serum magnesium, but some are better than others. Threonate is the best form of magnesium for the brain specifically, but bisglycinate, taurate, orotate, and malate are also good magnesium types for other purposes. So overall magnesium threonate appears to be quite a promising supplement for brain aging and improving certain aspects of brain health such as cognition or sleep. About fifty percent of people aren't getting enough magnesium and that has a detrimental effect on their long term dementia risk, but also the risk of heart disease, diabetes, hypertension, sleep problems, stress, and overall risk of dying. That's why most people benefit from some magnesium supplementation. It doesn't have to be threonate, but if you are looking to target specifically the brain benefits, then threonate is the best one. You can also get magnesium from certain foods such as pumpkin seeds, potatoes, leafy greens, hemp, almonds, salmon, and sea vegetables. But most of the magnesium in food is bound to natural compounds like citrate or oxide, which means it has much lower brain bioavailability. So threonate might still be superior for the brain here. In my opinion, magnesium threonate is a god tier supplement. It's one of the best supplements out there. But there are other types of magnesiums that are also god tier. Check out my video where I rank a 100 of the most popular supplements from worst to best.