Simply the total amount of hard sets you do per week, that's gonna be the number one driver of muscle growth. The average gym goer trains some seven to 10 reps away from failure. That is simply the number one reason that they still look the same when you get to the gym. Two years later, you see the same person. They look exactly the same. Mino, welcome back to the show. Pleasure. Yeah. I'm, glad to have you, and, we're gonna do, like, a overview of, the latest strategies and most optimal strategies to build muscle, lose fat, and improve, body composition. But I wanna start with, is there anything, surprising or very, like, interesting that has been discovered recent over the last few years maybe about, body composition and muscle growth that we didn't know before? I would say that's for muscle growth. Some of the most important findings have been the emphasis on length mediated hypertrophy or stretch mediated hypertrophy, that the long length exercises generally seem to be better than most other exercises. And this largely explains the findings of full range of motion generally being superior. So we used to say full range of motion is best and you want the extra range of motion. And we knew or, you know, experts knew that it's not the actual joint range of motion that matters, it's the functional excursion. It's the the change in muscle length. But it seems that it's specifically going to longer muscle lengths that is important for muscle growth. So if you ex increase the range of motion by going to a shorter muscle length, that doesn't actually seem to be beneficial. So that explains why if you squat deeper, if you lower the bar more during a bench press, that just generally advantageous. But it means that locking out, for example, at the top may not be necessary. So that's one interesting trend of research that we have a lot of studies on. We're still gathering a lot more information because the initial study seemed to be extremely positive. But then as more research came out as often, there's some regression towards the mean and we see that the effect is much smaller than believed and maybe context dependent as well. Gotcha. So for one example of that would be like the lat pull down, right, if you go over the top then you can, like, really stretch it out then pull it down so that's a longer range of motion and it Yes. Would result in greater hypertrophy. Exactly. And so it appears that that's beneficial, but it may not be so beneficial or necessary to really lower it all the way down to your chest. So if you were to consistently lower it to, you know, just below the chin, that's probably equally good. Now I do still like lowering it to the chest for some purposes because it's you cannot fake it. Like, the bar either touches your chest or it doesn't. And what you often see if people, they lower it kind of to below the chin, then it starts going here and then they start moving up the head instead of pulling the bar down. And then, you know, it's, it's a bit of a slippery slope when it comes to cheating and technique. Mhmm. Yeah. And I I do remember, like, pro bodybuilders when or if you look at pro bodybuilders doing, like, a chest press, then, they don't, you know, lock their elbows out at the top completely. They kind of go a few few degrees off, and then the the biggest stimulus comes at the bottom anyway. Yep. Yeah. I would say that pro bodybuilders, some of them do things right intuitively, but there are also a lot that don't use four inch motion at the bottom either. So they just kinda stay in mid range, which is probably also not ideal. Yeah. Yeah. Anything in the diet world surprising? Most research has come down to the conclusion of energy balance being the main determinant. Protein intake is debated again with some research indicating higher intakes than previously believed may be beneficial. The support for that is quite weak, though. Less research or more research has found that carbohydrates are not as important as many people thought. I've long been skeptical of carbohydrates being necessary for strength sports, but now research has been I mean, I wouldn't say completely conclusive, but quite strong that carbohydrates have a very small role, if any, for muscle growth and strength development. Mhmm. Yeah. And that's because you you utilize glycogen for, you know, this, strength based movements. But if you do, let's say, five, even 10 reps, then you're not using that much glycogen that you would need to consume carbohydrates for. Like, your body would replenish the glycogen even without carbs, but, you know, consuming carbs would do it, like, a little bit faster. Right? Exactly. The glycogen stores in muscle are sufficient to cover around two workouts for most people. And that's assuming the workout is already quite high volume for that one muscle group because if you do a full body workout, you might conceivably do some pre workouts or so before you would run out of glycogen stores. Now there are some muscle fibers which run out a bit faster, like the type two fibers, But still, most people just don't get near the volumes that are required to completely deplete glycogen stores or even get to the level where contractile functioning is impaired. And then afterwards, most people have at least twenty four hours in between their workouts, and you actually get very high glycogen resynthesis even if carbohydrate intake is is not very high. So we used to think like, oh, if, you know, the body doesn't get carbs, then it it cannot resynthesize glycogen. But actually, it has quite some pathways, including the use of a fat to synthesize, glucose and, thereby glycogen. And also the Cori cycle by which carbohydrate is essentially or glucose is essentially recycled when it when it's produced, when lactate is produced, and then it's recycled back to glucose. So there are some pathways by which the body can quite not as efficiently as with carbohydrate, but still quite efficiently, synthesize carbohydrates. And the nice thing is that all these pathways are upregulated when someone is on a low carb diet. So the body's much more adaptive than many people think. Mhmm. Yeah. And what level of, I guess, strength and muscle are we talking about? Like, do professional athletes also don't need any carbs then or, at what level do does it become advantageous? It's mostly the modality of exercise, like the type of exercise you do, not so much the level. A professional bodybuilder, for example, might still not require pretty much any carbs. And there are some very successful bodybuilders even that have low carb diets. It's just that when you're on a low carb diet, everything is a little bit more deflated. So you look leaner. You you are literally a little bit deflated because glycogen stores they stabilize at the lower level, something like 80% of baseline normally. So you, your muscles are a little bit less full, but you also retain less water, and that creates the look of being drier but a bit less full. And I think people associate that acute effect with the long term change, and those are different things. So if you go into ketogenic diet right now, then you're immediately, in like two days, gonna lose substantial amount of weight, almost all water, and then your muscles will look less full, but you're gonna look drier, your six pack's gonna come out better. And then people think, oh, it's great for cutting, but it's not so great for building muscle. It's just no. That's just the acute effect, not the long term effect. Gotcha. Yeah. As regard to your question about the type of exercise, if you're talking about a concurrent athlete or something, then the carbide requirements increase dramatically. So if you give me a tennis player as an athlete, as a client, then it's a very different story from someone that just does strength training. Because as you said, the strength training is, like, five to 10 repetitions often, then you have a rest interval. It's very different from somebody that does tennis, which is, like, almost continuous, high intensity interval training for quite long periods of time for the same muscle groups with very, short break activities or shocker, which is also essentially a combination of long term, like, steady state longer cardio interspersed with short sprints. So those have far, far higher glycogen requirements for performance. Mhmm. Yeah. And, like, CrossFit is probably one of the most glycolytic sports out there. Yeah. So interestingly, even CrossFit seems to be at the point where it's kind of like in the middle Okay. Where we see that, there's still not a consistent effect on performance. So that's, I think, very strong research that, yeah, where you get to even lower levels than or or substantially lower levels than or substantially lower levels than that in terms of glycolytic requirements, we we don't get the, the need for carbs, like power lifters, bodybuilders. It it's it's not even close for most people. CrossFit is like, okay. Yeah. There you would really expect it, but we still don't really see consistent effects in research. Yeah, that's interesting. So yeah, maybe let's start with resistance training itself, so training component. How do you need to train to facilitate muscle growth? We can start from the main, like, signaling pathways and then, talk about the different prep schemes and sets, etcetera. So the primary driver of muscle growth is the mechanical tension on the muscle fibers, which is essentially the same as the internal force output. So the muscle has to produce force, and when it produces a lot of force, and that's a limiting factor for the movement, the muscle essentially learns to produce more force. And one of the ways that adapts to that is by getting bigger, because if you have higher cross sectional area, it's like a bigger engine, you could produce more force. So the way you do that is by exposing muscle to or using heavy enough weight, something you cannot do 30 repetitions with, generally speaking, and then going close to failure, you get a lot of tension on the muscle fibers. And then you need to do that for enough total time under tension. And I'm not talking about, like, the time under tension per set, but the total amount per week even. Mhmm. So muscle has a certain level of stimulus that it receives from every set that you do, and the distribution over time doesn't seem to be that important. It's more of a cumulative effect. So you can do a lot of volume in one day. You could spread it out across the week. But the easiest way to think about this in practice is simply the total amount of heart sets you do per week. That's gonna be the number one driver of muscle growth. It's like the equivalent of your energy balance for fat loss. Like, for fat loss, the number one thing you want is, like, your total cumulative energy deficits across the week as a whole. And then for muscle growth, the number one thing is the total amount of sets per muscle group per week. Mhmm. Does it have to be close to failure or how close to failure does it need to be? Where where does it characterize as, like a hard hard set? Yeah. That's there is, it's mostly linear when you get to reasonably high levels of effort. So when you're within at least five reps to failure, we can say that it's mostly the total repetitions that you do that are the best proxy. So if you leave, for example, five reps in reserve, then you're gonna have to make up for those five reps in in another set to get the same growth. And we see that in research where we compare, say, three sets to failure versus four sets, not quite to failure, but with the same total number of repetitions as those three harder sets. And we see that you get equivalent results between those two groups. So in that case, the reps seem to be kind of equally effective. But when you get to, you know, more than five repetitions away from failure, the reps do seem to be a little bit less effective per repetition, especially when you get below eight reps to failure. So you're not you're not even close to failure. Right. Now that's for most serious strength trainees, that's not a real consideration. But there is actually a recent meta analysis that found that the average gym go gym goer trains some seven to 10 reps away from failure. Okay. And that That is simply the number one reason that they still look the same when you get to the gym. Two years later, you see the same person. They look exactly the same. It's like, yeah. Right. Doesn't matter, you know, what kind of small optimization you're doing if you're training 10 reps away from failure. Yeah. Yeah. So rather than stopping when it gets even slightly uncomfortable, you need to stop when you can't move any more than, like, a few reps, like, two, three reps anymore. Yeah. A good guideline for both coaches and individuals is that you should experience slowdown in your repetitions, especially if you're training for muscle hypertrophy. Like, if your last rep looks the same as your first rep, then there is very little velocity loss, and you're most likely not close to failure. Yeah. And what intensities are we talking about? So, like, obviously, one rep max is your 100% maximum, and, 50% is, you know, 50% of that. What kind of intensities do you need to lift to what is, like, the bare minimum threshold and what is, like, a sweet spot in your opinion? Because if you only do one rep maxes right, then that's, you need to do a lot of, sets and reps for that. Exactly. Yeah. The the the only issue with going heavy is that you get very little time under tension per set. So if you're doing, you know, sets below four repetitions, most people say about five to 30 is the range. So if you are not even doing five reps per set, then you might have to do additional sets to compensate for the the very low number of reps that you're doing per set. But in principle, you know, every rep one repetition, that's 100% of your one RM is is better than one repetition at 90%. The only issue is that you can only do one repetition because it's your max. So per repetition is probably a little bit more effective, but per set, it's very ineffective. And then the kind of lower lower intensity that you have to hit, so the minimum intensity threshold seems to be very low, much, much lower than believed ten years ago. It's around 30% of honor m or 30 repetitions. I usually go with whatever is, harder because some people at 30% of honor m, especially women, they could do, like, 80 repetitions, and it just becomes completely impractical, not to mention just boring and, excruciating to do to do the set. So, like, thirty forty repetitions or 30% of on a run is, like, the the minimum you need. And it seems that when you go below that, you you just can't get the the level of mechanical tension anymore. Like, if you're doing 80% of one RM, almost all of your muscle fibers, especially if you're training explosively, are recruited. All the motor units, they are at least recruited to some extent every repetition. And then when you get to a lower intensity, you don't recruit them from the start, but it's like the the big guys come in to help when the smaller guys get tired, sort of. That's the size principle of motor unit recruitment. So, technically, local neuromuscular fatigue lowers the recruitment threshold to higher threshold multi units. And then the the bigger multi units with more type two fibers, which have more growth potential, they kick in, and they start helping later on in the set. And the funny thing is that if you look at velocity and a motor unit behavior, the last, say, five repetitions of a set of 20 are actually very similar to if you do a five five RM. And if you look at someone's final repetition of a 20 rep max set, if they are truly going to failure, It looks very similar to the last repetition of a five rep max set. Yeah. Interesting. You you see, like, these calisthenic athletes often, they do a bunch of reps and they still look pretty, muscular. So, like, they do 100 push ups, 100, dips, or whatever like that. And, because they're they're still, you know, within this effective range of intensity, but they do so many reps that they take it so close to failure that the signal is still there. And the opposite the polar opposite of that would be, like, a strength athlete, like a power lifter or a bodybuilder that they do all of, like, five reps, six reps, and, the intensity is greater, but they do less reps, so they still reach that, I guess, the hard zone, much faster in a in a shorter amount of time. Yeah. It's also why you see things like people getting jacked in prison. Mhmm. A lot of people, like, bodybuilders, they they learn about weight training and optimized exercise, and they're like, why why are these guys still getting jacked? Doesn't make any sense. Like, they're just doing push ups. And all push ups are actually not that bad. You can especially if you elevate them, if you increase your range of motion, you use full, a good technique, then if you're especially if you cannot do 30 strict push ups yet, which many people can't, and you just go to failure and you do enough sets, you can build a lot of science with that. And especially when you add dips and chin ups, you can progress a long, long way with bodyweight exercises. So that's when you see these calisthenics athletes in the park and stuff. If you're going out with good genetics in particular, then, yeah, you can actually get some really good physiques equal, to if they were to go to gym. Yeah. But what about this isometric exercises like a front lever and this planche? They're, like, completely isometric during the set. And would that also then yield the same muscle hypertrophy results? Because you don't see, like, gymnasts who do a lot of these things. They're not, like, massive. Although they spend a lot of time under tension during these isometric exercises. It seems that isometrics are a little bit less effective than dynamic exercises, but it's mostly due to the length of the muscle at which the isometric contraction takes place. So an isometric contraction means that you are doing an exercise and the muscle is not changing length. You're producing just amount of force and you're in you're static. You're in the same position. Now if you are doing that at a short muscle length, it's not that effective. But if you're doing that at a very long muscle length, it's gonna actually be very effective. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. So what I found when I do some of these exercises is that they're very pretty good for strength. Like, you get, quite stronger with them, but, yeah, you don't see the muscle hypertrophy as much. Or maybe I'm not doing enough, time under tension with it. Like, maybe I need to do, like, I don't know, five or ten minutes in total per workout, to, reach some effects. But, yeah, for strength, they definitely work quite a lot. Yeah. So you need to have holds, you know, I'm guessing at least ten seconds and maybe to be safe, even more than that. So it's more of a prolonged, sadness. Also, mentally, for a lot of people, it can be harder to push yourself to go to failure with an isometric contraction because it's more like endurance exercise where if you're not it's it's hard to explain. But psychologically, it's for some reason much harder if you don't have a target. And there's also some research to indicate that if you know you can do 10 repetitions and you have to push yourself to get all 10 of them, it's much easier to do that than with an isometric where it's like, you can hold it for about ten seconds, but then it's a very slippery slope, just like, you know, a run to exhaustion. If you run on treadmill for max speed or max distance, for three minutes or something, there's much more variance there than if I tell you, you know, do this weight, do as many reps as you can. It's gonna be, like, eight on average. Maybe sometimes you only get seven. On a really bad day, maybe you get six. Maybe on a great day, you can get nine. But with endurance training and isometrics and script strength too, it's much more dependent on your, your emotional level, your input, your motivation. Did you sleep well? Is someone shouting in your ear to perform maximally? Yeah. What about sprinting? Like, that's a very common image you see online that the sprinters are also project and maybe, like, cyclists as well, like, they do this sprint cycling. They have massive, quads. Yeah. But it's not the actual cycling or the well, not the the cycling in the sense of being on a bicycle at least. Cycling in the sense of drugs maybe. That, gets them that physique. So most sprinters, they do a lot of strength training. So if you look at an Olympic level sprinter, for one, it's the ones that are doing the 100 meter sprinting or less. Those are the ones that are jacked. And they're jacked because their training does not resemble endurance training at all. They do, like, five, ten second sprints, and then they rest for long periods of time. So the rest to work ratio is very much like people in the gym, where the the effort is relatively short duration, and then you have a long rest period. And they on top of that, they do a lot of essentially bodybuilding slash strength work. So they they basically just have a lot of gym work and then high protein intake and diet, and they get shredded because losing weight and fat in particular is also very effective to get faster. Yeah. In fact, one of the best ways to get faster is to lose fat. It's much easier to get faster by losing weight than it is to get faster by building muscle. Mhmm. So, yeah, if you're shredded and then you're doing a lot of strength training and then you add some sprinting on top of that, And then when you look at the best best sprinters in the world, you you're also talking about people with great genetics and many of them are on drugs. So, yeah, then you can get you have, great physiques generally. Yeah. Yeah. So it's not that sprinting will build you like massive quads. It's like, what they do behind the scenes is they they do a lot of squats and, Bulgarian split squats and those things that build this build the quads and the legs. And the split on top of that is their actual sport, but, it might contribute a little bit, right, but, not a lot. Exactly. What about, like, these different types of, let's say, modalities of, building muscles or, like, compound lifts, machines, calisthenics? We discussed already a little bit, but, is there any difference between, these barbell free weights and, machine exercises? Not much. Most research that has come out has found that machines, free weights, cable, dumbbell, barbell, kettlebell, it's all equally effective. Bodyweight exercises too. Now you do want something that has dynamic contractions with an eccentric and a concentric component. So that's not the case for everything. Bands training, for example, is probably not that effective because the resistance curve is very poor. You basically get the most resistance in the shortened position. And depending on what type of exercise you do, it can be more concentric based. And you want that eccentric, that tension during the lowering phase or during the lengthening phase of the muscle that is producing a lot of the muscle growth. So as long as you have that, it doesn't matter if you're lifting a machine or your grandma, you get the same, results if you're getting the same mechanical tension on the muscle fiber. The muscle doesn't care what it's lifting. It just registers the tension that it's producing. Mhmm. Gotcha. Is there any difference in, like, the growth hormone or testosterone response I've seen in some of the research on on the compound that's figuring that? Yeah. It does. It seems to be more related to the total work output, so the the compoundedness of the exercise, if you will. But it doesn't seem to affect muscle growth so much. In fact, the hormonal output during a session is much more metabolic than it is an anabolic. So growth hormone release, for example, has more to do with fuel substrate use than it is to actually grow. Yeah. Yeah. That's a misconception about growth hormone that, you know, fasting increases growth hormone, but you're not gonna get jacked from just fasting. Yeah. And, what I've actually heard a few years ago is that it's not even like the testosterone that determines the muscle growth in natural, it's more about more about, like, the, androgen receptor density, If I'm Yeah. There's a lot of variance between individuals in how they respond to a given dose of testosterone. Okay. So if you look across individuals, some people that have high testosterone versus people that have low testosterone, The relationship between testosterone and muscle mass is very weak. Funny enough, the relationship's actually a lot stronger between testosterone and low body fat levels, but that's a form of reverse causation. Because overweight people, they aromatize most of their, testosterone into estrogen. So Right. Oh, there's even something called, was it obesity, hypogonadism. But, basically, hypogonadism secondary to obesity. Mhmm. And, that explains why generally overweight people have lower levels of testosterone. And therefore, you get that causation or correlation that seems like causation where testosterone is correlated with low body fat levels. Mhmm. But if you look within individuals and then you increase their testosterone level, then you get very consistent effects. So even within the normal range. If you get from the lower end to the upper end of the normal range, you build it's like one pound of muscle approximately per 100 on the range of 300 to 1,300. So that's a nontrivial difference for sure when you get to the from the very lower to the very upper end of the range. Gotcha. And then, yeah, if you go higher with steroids and the like that, you get even bigger effects, of course. Yeah. So if I were to double my testosterone with, you know, most likely the only way possible to do that would be with anabolics, then I would build more muscle as a result of that. Yes. So and it doesn't even have to be, like, doubling even if I increase it by, let's say, 200, nanograms. Yeah. So you could go from something like 300 to 600 if your lifestyle is not optimized at all, and then you go to sleeping enough, stress management, sufficient fat intake, generally, appropriate training volumes, so not overtraining, but also not undertraining. When you do those things right, then it's it's quite possible to go from something like 300 to 600. You probably won't go from 600 to 1,200, though. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So my my average is, like, 750 to 800. So, yeah, it's gonna be hard to double that within a means. Yes. Yeah. So it doesn't matter if you do compound lifts or machines or cables or anything like that. I guess the only difference would be the functional component, like, a barbell squat mimics a lot of actual, you know, everyday activities, and a pull up is quite functional and a deadlift is, you know, very functional movement. Yeah. So it's very specific to the movement, and it's functional to this to the extent that what you're training for mimics Mhmm. What you what you want to do. A little. Yeah. So, like, a pull up is is functional if you want to do pull ups or rock climbing or something like that. But it's no more functional than a pull down if you're doing arm wrestling because there's very little direct, crossovers. Gotcha. Yeah. Yeah. So, you you don't mimic the exact movement patterns in everyday life, but you do get better at, like, pulling, pushing, and, you know, the squatting moment motion? Yep. Yeah. There especially for beginners, there is some movement that a compound exercise has bear has much better carryover in general. So there's even one study which is kinda crazy where they found that doing leg presses increased leg extension strength more than doing leg extensions. And that only happens in beginners because normally, specificity is king. Like, what the exercise you do is the exercise you get the most strong at, and there's nothing you can do to get better at a certain exercise or movement than that exact movement. Mhmm. But in beginners, you get that improved coordination from learning how to coordinate different muscles at the same time. Right. That can improve strength and also increase race coding. So it increases, like, the central drive to those muscle groups. And that's that's quickly tapers off because it's not that difficult to learn for the body. But when you get to so when you get to that, you know, novice intermediate phase, after that, it's mostly very specific movement, coordination. Mhmm. Gotcha. So it's like a leg press builds more leg muscles than a leg extension because it targets a lot of multiple leg muscle groups rather than rather than just single one. So if you have just stronger legs, your leg extension will be also stronger. Whereas if you do just leg extensions, then you train that single muscle and the progress is slower because you're So for advanced trainees, like, the leg extension will build leg extension strengths the most. But in beginners Mhmm. You might get a favorable effect of the leg press as the body learns to coordinate the muscles better. And the coordination is a lot more difficult to learn, so the the neural component of, strength is trained better with the leg press, and it can also increase rate coding. So the the total amount of, activation from the brain to the muscle increases. Mhmm. Gotcha. What about training frequency? So how how often should you train? How many times a week, one muscle group? I generally recommend training muscle group at least twice per week, but the total weekly volume is by far the number one factor. It specifically appears that training frequency becomes beneficial when you start crossing something like six to 10 sets per muscle group per session, which is very relevant for people doing bro splits and push pull x and the like because they routinely go over that if they're doing high volume. At that point, there's even a recent meta analysis that very strongly shows you're better off switching some of that volume or shifting some of that volume to another day. And it's simply because you could do more volume on that day. That seems to be the main reason. Mhmm. There may also be a factor that as you get more advanced, the anabolic window decreases in length. So you're just not gonna build that much muscle in one session, and there's a limit to how much muscle you can build in one session. And as you get to very advanced, it's probably unlikely that in one single workout, you can do so much growth that you're gonna grow your whole week. As a beginner, no problem. Advanced athlete, much more, unrealistic. If you were trained twice a week beyond that point, it seems to be mostly the increase in volume that you're getting. Because if you're doing, say, you know, nine sets of leg work on one day, squats, leg press, and then also split squats, And you take the split squats, and now you're not doing them after the leg press and the squats, you're gonna be much fresher. There's less neuromuscular fatigue. So you're doing them on Friday instead of on Monday with all the other leg work. Then you're gonna do more repetitions and or you're gonna do the same reps with more weight on the split squats. And as a result, that extra volume, it's is what's driving the extra muscle growth. Mhmm. Yeah. So the amount of the, high quality reps at this near maximum effort at your most amount of mechanical tension is what will build the the most muscle. And if you, yeah, like, if you do a very long workout, right, then you train only once a week, then you're not really you know, the the final reps and the sets are gonna be less quality than the first ones. So if you rest a few days in between and then you have another the same muscle group and then you have you've, you know, recovered a little bit so you can do it at the near maximum mechanical tension again, and repeat it. Right. Yeah. There was actually one interesting study with the VO2max as well recently that they had people doing either twice a week low intensity cardio and two high intensity interval sessions, so four workouts per week, or they did the same amount of volume as those did who four times a week in two days. So twice as long low intensity in one day and twice as long HIIT. So, like, a one hour HIIT cardio session, versus, twice a week for twenty minute twenty eight minutes. So they got the same increases in VO2 max. So you can do the same volume on one or two days as someone else who trains across the week, and you get the same effect. So you can choose which one you prefer. Yeah. For VO two max, there are a lot of parallels between how it's built and how the the muscle responds in terms of stimulus, and indeed it's like total weekly volume. I know in endurance training, you often talk about impulse, which is sort of the, you know, the the measure of average training volume. It's like total training time, multiplied by effort. So to get, like, a weighted average, effort under effort under attention, if you will, or, effort under time, time under effort. And, that's it's very similar to strength training, in that sense. And also the dose response, the frequency effects, it's it's, like, mostly total volume per week that matters. And there's a minimum intensity, a lot of parallels between strength and endurance. Yeah. What if someone is doing concurrent training? So they train cardiovascular exercise and strength training at the same time. So does it hinder that, the muscle growth adaptations if you do a lot of cardio? It can. Yes. Especially in more advanced trainees. In beginners, you know, everything builds muscle. And if you do more exercise, you might actually build more muscle if you add some cycling to the, the strength training. But when you get to train lifters, especially people that already have a decent amount of strength for muscle mass, generally, you see what's called a concurrent training effect or an interference effect by which the adaptations to both, but especially those of strength training and strength development are hindered by doing too much endurance training together with the strength training. And you can mitigate this effect a lot by separating the workouts. So, ideally, you want to do your cardio one day, your strength training another day. Or if you have to do them together, then it's better to do the cardio after the strength training, either ideally, like, a couple hours after, but otherwise, directly after the workout. The reason for that is that if you do your endurance training and then you do your strength training, then your strength training is gonna suffer because of the fatigue from the endurance training. But endurance training is much of the stimulus for endurance is things like fatigue and substrate depletion. So if you do strength training and then afterwards you go do cardio, then it was like you were doing, you know, some level of cardio for that hour of strength training already, and then you just increase the intensity. So endurance training doesn't suffer as much from having done strength training before as vice versa. Yeah. Just like pre fatiguing before the cardio. Yep. That strength training. And, essentially, strength training is a form of cardio. It's just, a relatively ineffective form because the the intensity isn't that high depending what exercise you do. If you do, like, squats of 20 reps, then it's actually pretty high. But then the rest of the falls very long for endurance training standards. The total amount of effective volume you do in a strength training workout isn't that high. But if you do, like, what I often do is full body workouts with combo sets, which means that you're doing, like, bench press, chin up, squats with a minute, two minutes rest in between, and you do relatively high repetitions, then the total cardiovascular strain is significant for that workout. So you actually you will see this in, like, your average heart rate. It will be elevated, quite a lot and for pretty much the entire workout. Whereas if you do, like, a free rep max and then five minute rest periods, like a power lifter, then the endurance training, stimulus is is trivial. Mhmm. Yeah. What would be, like, then a good weekly plan, like, a general plan for people to follow? So, you wanna aim at least, like, twice a week per muscle group for optimal muscle growth, but I guess, like, once a week is also fine if you do enough volume in those workouts. And, how would you and the rep scheme depends on your goals kind of, like, is it more strength, power based, or is it hypertrophy based? Yeah. So you mean for training primarily for hypertrophy? Yeah. So, like, muscle growth. Obviously, you're gonna get strong strength as well from that, but, it's less prioritized as with a strength pure strength training. Yeah. So you probably want to do at least two different types of workouts. And for maximum growth, you will have to train, you know, at least twice per weekend, probably three plus times simply to get the total volume in because most people want to be in the range of, like, 10 to 20 sets per muscle group per week. There are benefits to going higher than that in most research, but there's also some research indicating you get worse results. So it becomes more of a balancing act between your recovery capacity and, the benefits of the higher volumes and also things like injury risk. And if you're doing, say, 20 sets per muscle group per week, that's substantial, and you're gonna have a hard time trying to fit that in. Like, in one workout, 20 sets for every single muscle group is just not gonna happen. For most people, six is already very difficult. So if you're going with 20, you probably need four workouts realistically, and those will still be long workouts. So for most people, you know, if you're doing something more like 12, which is still very effective for many people, you can get that done reasonably well in, say, three workouts per week. Mhmm. Gotcha. And, how many so it's 10 to 20 sets is the, like, per week recommended to get per muscle group. So, pulling muscle, pushing muscle, and leg muscle. Yeah. It's a good general guideline. Right? Because it's the optimal training volume is highly individual. If you have, say, an investment banker as a client and they barely sleep, they have super high stress, they don't consistently get their protein in, 50 years old, you probably don't wanna push them to, like, 40 sats per week per muscle group. But then if you have 20 year olds, student that is that has almost no stress in their lives and they're doing everything well and they're bulking, consistently getting their protein in, like low stress, sleeping nine hours every day, then, yeah, you can you can push up the volume, a lot more probably. Mhmm. Gotcha. But I guess, you know, the smart thing to do is to do as much as you can to get the most change and not more than that. So the unnecessary volume, you know, you might not get any and it might become more harmful that this excessive amounts of volume. So you need to find, okay, what amount of volume and how many workouts will give me results. And, if you start doing too much, then it might might become negative. Yeah. So you can kind of climb the slope from the minimum effective volume, which is very low. Like Mhmm. Four sets per week per muscle group can vary consistently if you if you train hard, gets pretty good gains. You can to get that done in even one serious workout per week. And then it should kind of climb the volume slope, and you're getting into the more optimized gains, but with more time investment. And then as you keep going, pushing it up to 20 plus sets per week per muscle group, you get into that range where the risk reward becomes much, much poorer because every additional set that you do contributes only marginally towards muscle growth, whereas injury risk increases significantly, and it might not even be a positive effect at all because you just can't recover from it. Yeah. One thing we didn't discuss yet is, like, rest inter intervals between sets. So, is there any difference of how long you rest? Yes. Generally, we we've conducted, some research on this as well. If you rest longer, you get better gains, and it seems to be that it's because of the volume. The best study on this is by Longo et al, where they directly compared different rest intervals and volume equated, like, equating for the volume that you get from the additional rest. And they found that it doesn't matter, just like with the training frequency, basically. It doesn't matter if you get the extra repetitions from additional set or from resting longer. And if you think about it, the rest interval is essentially the same consideration as training frequency. You're talking about how you're gonna spread the volume over time. We just call it a rest interval and we measure it in minutes, and we call it training frequency consideration where we talk about days. Right. But the effects is the same. Like, you could spread it across the week and you get more volume done when there's more time in between the two sets that you're doing. Mhmm. Yeah. And if you do heavier weights, so heavier intensities, something like 80% of your one rep max, then you need to rest longer, like three minutes, four minutes. Yeah. You especially if you get to, you can rest a bit less when you do very high rep work because you don't need to do all the repetitions. It's if you have some fatigue still from the last set, it might actually be beneficial. Because otherwise, you still need to do the first ten, twenty reps to get the, high professional multi units recruited at all. Mhmm. But it this it's actually not entirely clear if you need to if the rest falls that different for different intensities. Mhmm. But if you are doing 80% of one RM and you don't rest longer, you're getting, say, only three repetitions, then for sure, you you need to rest longer because just because the volume is now so low that it's, very beneficial to rest longer to until you can do more reps. Yeah. Yeah. What if you don't have limited time and you're doing, like, some of these, supersets and, drop sets and stuff like that? Mhmm. I think they're super beneficial. The problem is just that mentally for most people, actual supersets are are not doable. They're not doable in the gym logistically. And also mentally, if you just finish a set of squats and immediately after you do bench press or chin up, you're just gashed, you can't give maximum performance. So what I like to do is called what I call combo sets. A combo set is just multiple exercises together that you do in a in a combo, and you do rest between the exercises. But the exercises don't overlap in which muscles they train. So you could do, in your case, like push pull and leg exercise. And you rest only as long as needed for your cardiovascular recovery. So you've, you know, caught your breath. Your heart rate is back to some sane level. And then, you go into the chin ups. And if you're reasonably well conditioned, the conditions that might be done in one minute even after chin ups or a compound exercise, whereas you would need maybe five minutes to have near full recovery afterwards. The nice thing about this is that you can do squats, bench press, chin up, for example. And by the time you go back to the squats, probably five minutes have passed. And that means that your recovery on the squats is really good. But in that in those five minutes, normally, you would have just rested until you did your second set of squats, but now you've got two more exercises in. So you basically cut your workout time into a third. Yeah. Yeah. That's pretty good advice for if you have limited time. What I've with calisthenics, it's super easy, like, and, you can combine, like, pull ups with dips and because you're doing a lot more reps, you're still getting, like, a pretty effective, signal from every, set that you do, and, it saves a lot of time if you do, like, pull ups immediately into dips and maybe squats or something or or abs or something like that. Yes. Exactly. That's that would be a great combo. Yeah. With nutrition so nutrition, we established that, you know, carbohydrates aren't that important. What about protein and the fats? Fats also aren't that important directly for muscle growth, but you do want to have certain intake to support good hormonal functioning, get your fat soluble nutrients in and the like. So for most people, you want to get your fat intake no lower than 20% of energy intake. You could try setting it per body weight, but, you know, if your energy intake goes low enough, then you just sometimes you just have to compromise on fats. And then protein intake is is very beneficial, so you don't wanna compromise on that. It's clear that you get significant benefits from at least 1.6 per kilogram per day. And I generally recommend 1.8 for most, people that are pretty serious. And then some meta analysis find that you get benefits from maybe higher intakes, but there isn't a single direct study finding in controlled conditions that there are benefits above 1.6. 1.8 is already quite conservative. And then when you get to these levels like 2.2 for bodybuilders, common recommendation in bodybuilding circles, it's very, questionable if you get any return on that. So for, like, the average individual, the cost per cost benefit is, very questionable. Yeah. You hear a lot of people say that, you know, just one gram per pound of body weight, which is a 2.2 grams per kilogram, which, yeah, it doesn't have any, like, real, support for that that you actually already maximized most of the gains from just 1.6 or, yeah, like I said, 1.8 maybe. Yeah. It turns out it wasn't too far off, but indeed the original support was very, just, oh, it was, that's like a nice round number. Yeah. One thing that you know, might be useful for your average people is that if they eat more protein, then they're eating less of something else. So they eat less carbs and fats. And that because the higher protein has higher thermic effect of the food, so they burn more calories for digesting the protein, so they're creating a bigger calorie deficit by doing that. So maybe maybe that is a good, like, a good rationale that they see more fat loss results from eating more protein. Yeah. A little bit. But if you run if you run the numbers in research, the effects are quite disappointing. Mhmm. Especially when the like, if you were replacing it depends a lot on the food choice. If you are replacing pure butter with chicken breast, yes, there's a sizable difference in firmic effect. But if you are replacing something like spinach, right, or some super high fiber food or avocado or olives or something with lot of MUFAs or fish with omega threes, which also have high firmic effect, coconut oil with MCTs. Right? There are a lot of those foods that have a pretty high firmic effect as well. If you replace those with chicken breast, it it doesn't have, much of a difference. Right. Yeah. You're, in most cases, not eating pure macros. You're eating, different foods. Exactly. Mixed mixed foods. But, yeah, I guess people do it as a more just to be safe than sorry. They just exceed the amount of, protein, and it doesn't appear to have, like, any negative health effects unless you have some kidney problems. So, like, I guess, why not? Yeah. It's it's that's why protein, I generally frame it as a minimum, not as a a hard number. Mhmm. And calorie intake, I frame it more as a budget. They want to try to stay within the budget. And then fat intake too, I frame it more as, like, a minimum or a range. Carbohydrate intake also, more of a range. Like, if you don't wanna dip into ketosis, then, you know, a 100 gram net carbs minimum is a pretty good target. Most people don't feel great if they they kind of sometimes dip into ketosis, but they don't a keto adapt. So in that sense, there is more of a a behavioral minimum that you want to, get. But by and large, it's just the the total energy balance over time. That's the number one determinant. Yeah. With with the carbohydrate thing, it, like, if you're not in ketosis and you're kind of in this periphery zone, so eating a 100 grams of carbs, you're not in ketosis, but you're not really getting a lot of glucose as well for energy use, would then that be like a suboptimal scenario because you're in this periphery zone. You're not fully using fat for fuel, and you're not getting enough glycogen or more more carbs as well for optimal performance. So would it be better than to just be, like, you know, higher carbs, get, like, 200, 250 grams of carbs and not a lot of fat, or just be, you know, like, I guess, state of ketosis? I would generally recommend that indeed you stay out of the, twilight zone. Right. There is indeed one study in which a cyclical ketogenic diet, Kaisel et al, underperformed the western diets for muscle growth even. Wow. I wouldn't expect a lot of affected directly for things like muscle growth. But in terms of well-being, cognitive functioning, many people just don't perform well if they kind of go into the slip into the keto few some keto flu sometimes. So if you behave less well cognitively, your mood is down, that can indirectly affect your training performance, and you can get effects on those things as well even if there aren't, like, huge direct physiological effects. Mhmm. Is it the same with fat? Like, if you go too low fat there's too much adaptation that is acute there. Like, keto adaptation is quite rapid and you feel it. It's very significant for a lot of people. It's also why a lot of people quit ketogenic dieting. They go into keto diets. They get the keto flu, and they're like, oh, this is terrible, and they give up. So they never keto adapt, and they don't know what the benefits are like. With fats, you don't really have that. In fact, I would say that low fat diets, especially in bodybuilding circles, are a common trap. So it seems like, oh, I'm I'm hungry, so what do I do? Well, you know, what if I change some of my fats to carbs? And then it's like, oh, you know, I I'm less hungry. I can eat more foods because fat is highly caloric per gram. But But then what happens is over time, you actually get more hungry and you get a lot of the negative behavioral effects of low fat intakes. And you also don't feel a negative effect to your testosterone level if you go to a fat intake of even zero. But over time, it's gonna substantially harm your testosterone production. And over the course of, say, months, you're you're probably gonna feel that. Mhmm. So I think low fat diets are kind of the reverse where it's it's a trap. It seems like, oh, there are no there are no negative effects. But then over time, you start noticing, actually, this is not so sustainable. Right. Yeah. I think I saw for one of the studies you shared was that 40% is, kind of the sweet spot of your macros as fat for testosterone production. You don't see additional testosterone benefits by going, I don't know, 70% fat, but but the 40% is the maximum. And if you like 20%, then, that's worse for testosterone than a 40%. Yeah. So if you have the calories, I think it's nice to get 40% of your energy intake from fat, and you don't need it for carbs because you're not, say, a soccer player. So then it's nice indeed. It's a marginal benefit, though. You know? It's not like your testosterone level doubles between those intakes, but Mhmm. Still a nice bonus. Yeah. With muscle muscle growth, so do you need to be in a calorie surplus, and how big of a surplus would you recommend? And, with cutting, losing body but but if at how big of a deficit is, you know, safe? Do not lose too much muscle. Yeah. You don't need to be in energy surplus to build muscle. It's a common myth. If you think about it, it makes no sense at all. Like, physiologically speaking, at any point in time in our bodies, the body is building and losing muscle mass, and you might, right now, be building muscle in your biceps, but losing a little bit of muscle mass in your quads. And it's at all different sites in your body, there is turnover taking place. And the we simply talk about the total balance as if that's, like, one thing, but it it's not. If you have open heart surgery and you get hospital foods afterwards, it's not like your heart cannot recover. Right? So that's and it is a muscle. So, the body recovers. It's just it recovers a lot better when you're in energy surplus. So you can build more muscle when you're in energy surplus. It's a lot easier. Whereas in energy deficit, you have to do things very well, and the deficits cannot be too large. So one math analysis found that on average in the literature, muscle growth sinks to basically zero when you get past the 500 calorie deficit per day. Now that's it's not like a hard rule that applies to everyone. Obviously, it's different for, like, a fifty kilo bikini competitor and a three hundred, kilogram sumo wrestler. So I usually think of it more as a percentage based off, your body fat level. So if you're a very high body fat level, you can pretty much crash diet. Like obese individual, there's very little risk. As you get leaner and leaner, you have to be more and more conservative to the point that, you know, in the normal healthy range, 20% deficit for many people is a pretty good ballpark number. But then as you get leaner, you may want to get, you may want to slow it down to something like even a 5% deficit for something like a contest competitor because the risk of muscle loss is so high. There's, like, no more fat to lose. There's a lot of muscle mass. The body will be much more easily incentivized to burn some of the muscle instead. Mhmm. So, that's how I think about deficit. And then the surplus, when bulking, you want to keep small. Many, many people overbulk. It's, called dreamer bulking now, and it only works if people are on steroids, basically. So if you're a natural trainee, then there's just a very small amount of muscle mass that you can build in any given day. You know, even in a month, it's not much. You can you can calculate based on the metabolizable energy density that has to go into the body to build one kilo of muscle. It's not much. And then if you divide that by 30, you're indeed talking about a very, very small deficit. So just a few percent even. For most people, it's basically the minimum amount of the minimum amount of weight gain that you can sustainably get. So, you know, you could be in a 50% calorie or 50 calories or plus might be ideal, but realistically, you cannot target that because you you don't know at that point if you're getting weight or not. So you want a very low weight gain rate, and then you want to measure your progress over time. That's very important. And if you see, like, I'm increasing my energy intake and, oh, immediately, waist circumference increases, caliper measurements increase, and don't really see a difference in strength gains, and they're like, probably excessive and taper it down. And if you still see any weight gain at all and, progress is good, strength gains are good, there's probably very little benefits from pushing up the surplus higher than that. Yeah. So, like the bigger the surplus, the more weight you will gain and you will gain more muscle as well with that, but you will also gain significantly more body fat compared to a small surplus where you will gain the same amount of muscle, but significantly less body fat. Yeah. So, that ratio between the additional muscle growth and the additional fat gain becomes highly unfavorable when you get past even 5% energy surplus. It's mostly additional fat that you gain. Yeah. So, like, even like a hundred, two hundred calories surplus is more than enough for most people as long as they're and the key key is, you know, to still, progress and lift heavy. Like, bulking is for most people just a excuse to eat whatever. Right? But and the training actually takes it like a back seater, which is the worst thing you can do at that point. Like you the training should take the bigger emphasis, when you have a small surplus of calories. Yes. And probably volume should increase in energy surplus versus an energy deficit because your recovery capacity should be better. And there is indeed some research that finds that people that, when they go into when they've there was a study on Ramadan fasting actually where people that start Ramadan fasting, they got better strength gains when they decreased their training volume by about 30% compared to before. Ramadan fasting obviously hinders recovery capacity. So it makes sense that you're better off being at your new optimized volume that you can recover from rather than being at the excessive volume that used to be good, but now you cannot recover from productively anymore. So if you are in a, let's say, calorie deficit, which, the Ramadan fasting is a pseudo, like, calorie calorie deficit to during daytime, then, you you actually wanna do, like, a little less volume because your recovery is worse. Yes. You wanna keep the intensity high, but you probably want to do a little bit less volume. That's interesting. Yeah. So, yeah, if you're in another, say, 500 calorie deficit, rather than doing, I don't know, at should you but but but the frequency should stay the same, like, you do wanna still do twice a week per muscle group, you just do less volume each, ex each each set. So I would just manipulate the total set number indeed or sets per exercise per workout. Right. Okay. That's that's interesting. What about eating frequency? Is there any, there was like a re two years ago by now, there was the study that showed the 100 grams of protein was still able to be absorbed and, enabled the body to utilize it for the next twelve hours compared to 25 grams. So it, like, exceeded that. So is, is the myth of that you need to eat only, like, four meals of 30 grams of pro protein I did by now, or, is it still better to eat multiple small meals per day? If you want to absolutely maximize muscle growth, I think you might need four meals, but I think you'll get very close with three meals per day. Mhmm. And two meals per day is likely significantly less effective, but still absolutely viable. So you can build muscle on two meals a day for sure, but it's probably gonna be less than if you have three meals a day. That's still based on Right. Most of the studies. The hundred gram of protein study, has to be contextualized in a sense that this was the only protein I received that day. It was after a workout, and the workout was done after an overnight fast. So the body was basically starving for protein and then what's called the technically, the muscle full effect is delayed in that condition. So fasting potentiates the anabolic response to a meal. It's like a compensatory effect for the the what you lost in the, in fasting hours. Mhmm. And then, with exercise, the what's called the muscle full effect is delayed even more. So basically, the body can allows for much higher protein synthesis after a workout than when you're resting. Like, if you're just resting, you're not doing anything, then the body obviously isn't gonna build much muscle. But after the workouts, your body's like, oh, give me the protein. Give me the protein. Like, we can build quite some muscle. So in those conditions, yeah, the hundred grams, they, they were effective. But in we still have a lot of other studies that are not, like, completely debunked now that show that in the normal circumstances when you had a meal before and you're not you didn't just do a workout, the effects are, they taper off a lot with higher protein. Yeah. Yeah. I guess that that study just showed that your body absorbs and uses it uses more than the twenty five, thirty grams that was, you know, commonly said. What what about, like, supplements? Are there any, like, supplements that are very favorable for body composition and, muscle growth? Wouldn't say any supplement's very favorable, but, creatine, just good old creatine monohydrate is, as good as it gets for many purposes. If you are a responder, you'll you'll get some additional gains from that, and it's pretty cheap too. Easy supplements, like, three grams for women, five grams for men is, quite good. And then there's mostly support for things that you're not getting from your diet. So I see supplements very much as supplements in that if you don't eat fish, you might benefit from omega omega threes. Many people that don't get enough sun exposure, they probably benefit from vitamin d three supplementation. You know, magnesium, zinc are common deficiencies. For women, iron has a lot of benefits typically. So they are more, the things that you're lacking in your diet for specific person rather than, oh, I have to take this every day to get, cocaine. Yeah. What do you think about, trimethylglycine? It's commonly advertised as, like, a muscle growth supplement, but, I haven't seen, like, a lot of, consistent results from evidence for that. Yeah. Me neither. And for most of these things, I was even if there is research, I would love to see it in protein controlled conditions. Like, if your protein intake is already sufficient, do we still see a benefit after that? Because we see that with most of the amino acids and BCAs and everything. You get those from your total optimized protein intake. So you don't need to also supplement that. Mhmm. Yeah. HMB is another, like, common, advertised as muscle growth supplement. And, what I think it's most effective for is for people like elderly people or like frail people and people who are under eating protein, for example. But, otherwise, young people who eat a lot of protein as well, they don't really see a lot of benefits from that. Yeah. There is some positive research in favor of it, but mechanistically, I'm also skeptical in people that already get enough protein because it is a leucine metabolite. Right? If you get enough leucine, then, you know, it's possible that you don't get enough HMB technically speaking, but we actually wrote a letter to the editors of the journals that published some of the positive research because there are a lot of significant, issues with that research and it's industry sponsored. So I think a significant grain of salt is warranted in interpreting it. Right. But, yeah, if you're under eating protein or you're in a, like, starvation style calorie deficit, then you might probably see some benefits. Right. But I would rather just recommend whey protein or something. Yeah. Just eat more protein. Yeah. Are there any other cheaper too. Yeah. Yeah. For sure. Are there any other supplements out there that are, like, making rounds or becoming popular? Not so much. Like, bet alanine and citrulline are popular in evidence based circles, but, again, not much compelling research support for them. Creatine have received a bit of a resurgence recently for its, positive, possible positive effects on cognition. So not just your muscles, but there's also creatine in the brain. So brain functioning might improve, but it's mostly in elderly individuals and people that have basically some, cognitive impairment rather than people that are just already healthy and have, like, an optimized lifestyle. And, yeah, there aren't a whole lot of, magic pills out there. Any fat fat burning supplements? For fat burning, fat burners is kind of a misnomer. The most effective semi fat burners are more like appetite suppressants. And funny enough, they're actually the things that are semi legal like, bronchate or nicotine. And, obviously, that nicotine comes with possible addiction effects and stuff. So, again, not not so much there where to What about caffeine? Just caffeine, coffee? Yeah. They're very ineffective because of the tolerance that quickly develops. Mhmm. And, most research finds that, caffeine supplementation has no positive body composition effects in the long term because of the small effects combined with the quick tolerance development means there's just nothing there long term. Gotcha. But, will you be doing, like, more movements or fidgeting and walking or something like that? A little bit, but there might also be some compensation for that afterwards. And at some point, both caffeine, which most people consume, you're mostly just fighting withdrawal symptoms. So you're not actually better off than if you weren't consuming caffeine. Most people use too much, so they, you know, they are just at the point where the caffeine intake fights the withdrawal symptoms constantly. Mhmm. And if they don't consume the caffeine, then they are worse off. Whereas if you use only a little bit of caffeine sporadically pre workout, sometimes, for, like, strategic work activities, for example, then you can actually boost performance a little bit. And you can you know, a hundred milligram per day or so can be sustainable. You can get some sustainable boost in performance. They're very small though. So, again, you don't you won't see that as, like, significantly increased muscle growth, for example. Yeah. Yeah. What I what I do notice if I take, like, a pre workout supplement that has a hundred and fifty a hundred and eighty milligrams of caffeine or something, then I do notice, like, much better workouts because of I'm just, you know, super an amped up and, like, alert. But I I get that effect because I don't consume it that often. Right? So if I take it every workout, then I will blunt that signal, and I'm not gonna be that alert and focused anymore. So it defeats the purpose. So I need to use it, like, strategically every once in a while only. Exactly. So, yeah. Well, thanks for coming to the podcast. Where can people learn more about you and your work? Metalhensmelons,uh,.com. Or if you're on YouTube, metalhensmelons or Instagram metalhensmelons. These days, the action is all on social media. So you can follow me there and, check out my content. Alright. Well, thanks, and I'll see you around. See you around. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Siim. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.