High amounts of visceral fat is a major risk factor for heart disease and diabetes. Normal visceral fat in the general population is less than 500 grams. For optimal health, you want your visceral fat to be below 350 grams. My recent DEXA scan one month ago showed I have only 59 grams, which is the lowest I've seen anyone else have. I actually decreased my visceral fat from 350 grams to 59 grams in a year by changing my exercise routine, which I'm gonna share with you in this video. Exercise is one of the biggest determinants of losing visceral fat. I'll share the studies in this video. And even from my own experience, I can say that you don't need to be on a low carb diet or a very low calorie diet to achieve low visceral fat. Obviously, just starting to exercise and getting off the couch is going to reduce your visceral fat. It can be walking, lifting weights, yoga, cardio, HIIT, or CrossFit. A 2024 meta analysis of 84 randomized controlled trials saw that all types of exercises were able to reduce visceral fat. However, some were better than others. Here's an overview of the types of exercise for reducing visceral fat. High intensity interval training, HIIT, and aerobic exercise, which refers to zone two cardio, were number one at about 30 to 35% reduction in visceral fat. Aerobic exercise plus resistance training resulted in 28 to 32% reduction. Resistance training alone at 25 to 30%. Minimal aerobic exercise, so just very easy jogging or hiking at 22 to 27% reduction. And HIIT plus resistance training at 20 to 25% reduction. The reason for this is because there weren't enough studies that combine HIIT and resistance training for visceral fat reduction. Realistically, HIIT plus resistance training would be around the same level as aerobic plus resistance training, so around 30%. So based on these massive amounts of studies, aerobic exercise and HIIT are the number one best way to reduce visceral fat. They're both more effective than doing resistance training, and combining resistance training with aerobic cardio increases the effectiveness of resistance training. There are also other meta analysis of several trials looking at this more specifically. This 2012 meta analysis of 35 studies compared aerobic exercise to resistance training. There were nine studies that directly compared aerobic exercise to resistance training, and seven of those studies favored aerobic exercise over resistance training, as you can see from this forest plot, although it didn't reach statistical significance. There were two studies that favored resistance training, but the effect size for those studies didn't reach statistical significance either, which means that there was no real difference between resistance training and aerobic exercise in those two studies. Overall, as shown by the white rhombus, aerobic exercise was much more effective in reducing visceral fat than resistance training. Interestingly, if the researchers looked at the effects of aerobic exercise alone on just the control group, there was a significant effect of aerobic exercise on reducing visceral fat. However, when the researchers looked at just resistance training, then there was no significant effect on visceral fat reduction compared to controls. What it means is that resistance training isn't nearly as effective at reducing visceral fat than aerobic exercise. Now, of course, if you're overweight, you start to lose weight, you start to exercise, you will see some reduction in your visceral fat. But with all things being equal and weight loss being equal, you would see a greater reduction in visceral fat with aerobic exercise. A 2013 meta analysis of 15 studies saw the same results. Aerobic exercise at moderate or high intensity was more effective in reducing visceral fat than resistance training, even without calorie restriction. So how did the people do this aerobic exercise in these studies? The most common intensity was 60 to 75% of max heart rate. In the initial training weeks, the intensity was quite low at 40 to 55%. But at the final weeks, it peaked at 60 to 90% of max heart rate. In the 2013 meta analysis, they saw that you need a certain threshold of aerobic intensity to see a significant reduction in visceral fat, which is above 60 to 70% of max heart rate. If you look at the heart rate zones, then it's either zone two or higher training. You need to be doing at least zone two cardio to see a significant reduction in visceral fat. You can either do zone two cardio for fifty to sixty minutes, which means you're still able to breathe through the nose at 60 to 70% of your max heart rate, or you do high intensity interval training at 80 to 100% of your max heart rate for a few rounds of a few minutes. Interestingly, this is exactly what I did when I saw a massive reduction in my visceral fat. I was doing primarily resistance training before, so my visceral fat was already kind of normal and in the optimal range. But by incorporating more cardiovascular exercise, specifically more zone two training and intervals, my visceral fat dropped from 350 grams to 54 grams. So what would be like an optimal exercise protocol for reducing visceral fat? I'll tell you exactly what it looks like. You still wanna do a combination of resistance training and aerobic exercise for all the other health benefits. For longevity, you achieve the best health benefits by doing both instead of one or the other. For visceral fat reduction specifically, you wanna incorporate aerobic exercise at 60% or higher of your max heart rate. I don't think you need to be doing exclusively zone two training or exclusively zone five training. You can do both, and they both work in reducing visceral fat based on the studies. However, I do think that you would benefit from adding at least one of these high intensity interval workout sessions per week at 80 to 100% of your max heart rate. So here's what an optimal workout plan for reducing visceral fat would look like. Resistance training three times a week for the benefits on your bone density, insulin sensitivity, and muscle mass. One high intensity interval training session per week. The intervals should be at least three minutes long and up to five minutes. Run three to five minutes at 80 to 90% of your max heart rate, and then walk or jog at a slow pace for three to five minutes. Repeat for three to five rounds. Zone two cardio at 60 to 70% of your max heart rate, you can do on the days you're not doing resistance training or the interval training. Theoretically, you can do zone two cardio almost every day because it's not that high intensity as HIIT. A 2023 meta analysis of 40 randomized controlled trials did find that exercise had a dose specific effect on reducing visceral fat. The more exercise you did, the more visceral fat you lost, even by burning over 5,000 calories per week from exercise. Remember that the only exercise that effectively reduces visceral fat is aerobic exercise at 60% or higher of your max heart rate. So the more zone two cardio you do, the lower your visceral fat can go. The same study found that for calorie restriction, the effect wasn't dose dependent. Reducing your calories more didn't result in greater visceral fat loss, and the benefits plateaued at around 4,000 to 5,000 weekly calorie deficit, which is around 570 to 710 calories per day. So what it means is that if you're already eating at a 500 to 700 calorie deficit per day, which would be like a safe and optimal calorie deficit, you're not expected to lose more visceral fat beyond that. So you don't need to reduce your calories lower than that. However, if you create a bigger calorie deficit through exercise, you exercise more rather than eat less. You'll keep getting benefits for reducing visceral fat. There's like a linear relationship between the more exercise you do, specifically more aerobic exercise, the lower your visceral fat can be. Alright. So let's bring it all together. Get your visceral fat below 350 grams for optimal health. You do need to lose some weight, especially if you're overweight, but calorie restriction can only take you so far. Incorporate aerobic exercise, both zone two training and interval training, to really torch visceral fat without limitations. There are also many things related to diet and your amino acid balance that can also affect your visceral fat. Check out my full protocol for reducing visceral fat next. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click a like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.