Reducing your visceral fat around the organs can be one of the most beneficial things for your long term cardiovascular disease and diabetes risk. I have very low visceral fat, only 54 grams. Which means that my metabolic health, insulin sensitivity and organ function is excellent. I've achieved such low visceral fat by adjusting my diet and exercise based on the clinical studies out there. But in this video, I want to refute some of the misconceptions and misinformation about reducing visceral fat. What increases it and how do you reduce it? I'll cover things like carbohydrates, fructose, exercise, cardio, coffee, and fats. The first lie or misconception is that you need to be on a low carb diet to reduce visceral fat. To not only avoid eating sugar and refined carbohydrates, but also any carbohydrates. And that the only way to lose visceral fat is to be on a low carb diet. The truth is that visceral fat is more affected by total calorie intake and your body weight than the carbohydrate percentage of your diet. I eat 300 grams of carbs per day from fruit, potatoes, vegetables, some grains, and yet I have very low visceral fat. The biggest reason for that is that I'm just very lean, insulin sensitive, and I don't overeat calories. Now I might be just like an anomaly or there might be some genetic differences, which is why we have to look at the studies done on other people. This 2,019 study saw that if you ate the same amount of calories and you replaced total carbohydrates with the same amount of calories from fat, you saw an increase in visceral fat and liver fat values. Replacing 5% of total calories from carbohydrates for dietary fat was seen to increase visceral fat by 0.42 liters and liver fat by 23%. The higher carb diets were associated with the lowest visceral fat, and the high fat diets were associated with the highest visceral fat mass. Now the shortcoming of this study is that is not a randomized controlled trial. It's a cross sectional analysis from a cohort in South Germany, but we do have some randomized controlled trials that I'll cover shortly. The most important thing that matters is total calorie intake. The higher the calorie intake, the higher the amount of visceral fat mass these people had. That's just logical. If you're eating too many calories and you're overweight, you're just gonna have more visceral fat. However, the additional wrinkle of detail is that if those calories are coming more from fat and less from carbohydrates, the ratio of visceral fat mass tends to increase in not only this analysis but others as well. And keep in mind, in this study, they controlled for the calorie intake. We also have a 2022 randomized controlled trial looking at different carbohydrate ratios for reducing visceral fat. They had three groups of carbohydrate intake, a high carb low fat diet with 42 to 44% carbohydrates and 36 to 38% fat comprised mostly of refined grains like bread and pasta. The second group was a whole foods high carb diet with 41 to 42% carbs and 37 to 38% fat comprised of minimally processed carbs like tubers, fruits, whole grains, etcetera, and a third low carb high fat diet with 11 to 15% carbs and 66 to 70% fat. All the groups ate the same amount of calories, 2,000 calories per day for women and 2,500 calories per day for men. What they found was that in six months, the refined high carb diet lost 14% visceral fat in six months and 12% in twelve months. The whole foods high carb diet lost 18% visceral fat in six months and 17% in twelve months. And the low carb high fat diet lost 17% visceral fat in six months and 13% in twelve months. Overall, there wasn't much difference in the visceral fat loss. Although the whole food high carb diet trended towards the greatest loss. Carbohydrate quality does appear to matter a little bit. In this 2022 analysis of the PREDIMED plus randomized control trial, they found that among overweight and obese adults with metabolic syndrome, improving carbohydrate quality was associated with favorable changes in visceral fat and overall fat deposition. The increased carbohydrate quality was reflected in eating more dietary fiber and whole grains, as well as eating less refined grains and refined carbohydrates. My point here isn't that you can't lose visceral fat on a low carb or a high fat diet. You clearly can as long as you're in a calorie deficit. What I am doing is pointing out the idea that you can't lose visceral fat on a high carb diet, which clearly isn't the case as shown by many randomized controlled trials. Based on these studies, a high carb diet actually results in greater visceral fat loss than a low carb diet, especially if the high carb diet is mostly based on whole food carbohydrates. The second point that is often brought up is that you shouldn't do any cardio if you want to lose visceral fat. You should just do weight lifting and walking because cardio increases cortisol, it's gonna keep you stressed out and it's going to prevent you from losing any fat, not to mention visceral fat. Well, is it true? The truth is actually the complete opposite. A 2024 meta analysis of 84 randomness control trials saw that all types of exercises were able to reduce visceral fat. However, some were better than others. Here's what they discovered about which exercise decreased visceral fat the most. High intensity interval training resulted in about 30 to 35% reduction in visceral fat. Aerobic exercise resulted also in 30 to 35% reduction. Resistance training alone resulted in 25 to 30% reduction. Resistance training plus aerobic exercise resulted in 28 to 32% reduction. And minimal aerobic training such as hiking and walking resulted in 22 to 27% reduction. So cardio whether that be high intensity interval training or aerobic exercise like zone two cardio decreases visceral fat significantly more than resistance training alone. Again, any type of exercise, both exercise, both weights and cardio can and will decrease visceral fat. It's just that the idea that you can't lose visceral fat when doing cardio or that cardio is worse for visceral fat than resistance training is just not true. It's the complete opposite. Based on the clinical trials, aerobic exercise is significantly more effective in reducing visceral fat than resistance training. And if you combine resistance training with aerobic exercise, you lose more visceral fat than with resistance training alone. In a 2013 meta analysis, they saw that you need a certain threshold of aerobic intensity to see a significant reduction in visceral fat, which was above 6070% of max heart rate. This is the zone two range for heart rate where you're not out of breath or gasping for air completely but you're still able to breathe through the nose during exercise. The next boogeyman is fructose and I'm not only talking about industrial fructose or high fructose corn syrup but also natural whole fruit. I agree that, you know, industrial fructose from sodas and sugarcet and beverages as well as high fructose corn syrup is not good for your liver health, is not good for your visceral fat. I think most people can agree with that. High fructose corn syrup and fructose consumption is seen to be associated with visceral fat. But that's not the case with fruit from whole foods. A 2024 randomized controlled trial on obese patients with type two diabetes saw that a diet intervention that included increased fruit consumption resulted in significant visceral fat loss of about 200 grams at a 2.7% decrease in liver fat. These people were in a 600 calorie deficit, which, you know, makes it obvious why they lost the visceral fat, but it highlights that eating fruit and increasing your fruit consumption isn't going to stop you from losing visceral fat if you're in a calorie deficit. But it doesn't seem that you need to lose weight to lose visceral fat when eating fruit. In this 2023 randomized controlled trial, they found that increasing daily fruit and vegetable intake to over eight servings per day improved metabolic health and visceral fat markers even without weight loss. Now they didn't lose visceral fat per se because they weren't in an energy deficit by design, but their inflammatory profile improved, which would indicate a healthier fat profile. In observational studies, fruit intake is inversely associated with visceral fat, meaning that higher fruit intake is seen to be associated with lower visceral fat with a maximum reduction seen at 1.5 to 2.5 servings of fruit per day. Beyond three servings, the visceral fat reduction plateaus. I'm not bringing this up to say that everyone needs to eat fruit to lose visceral fat. That's clearly not the case. Many people can lose visceral fat without eating fruit, but the idea that eating fruit is somehow uniquely damaging to your visceral fat or that you can't lose any visceral fat when eating fruit is simply not the case. The real world data suggests that people who eat moderate amounts of fruit have the least amount of visceral fat and replacing other calories with fruit tends to help with visceral fat reduction not hinder it. The final misconception is that drinking coffee will increase visceral fat or prevent you from losing it. Again, related to cortisol. If that were the case, then why is coffee consumption associated with less visceral fat? Drinking over five cups of coffee per day has been seen to be associated with the lowest odds of visceral fat in this twenty twenty five cross sectional study. And this study was done in Japan, which isn't a coffee drinking culture and is not part of what's considered a healthy lifestyle in Japan. We also have some randomized controlled trials showing that drinking lightly roasted polyphenol rich coffee for four weeks led to a statistically significant reduction in visceral fat by up to a 130 grams compared to placebo. The reason coffee appears to have these benefits on visceral fat and liver fat is because of its polyphenol content. So coffee doesn't increase visceral fat, it actually decreases it. Like I said, I've managed to take my visceral fat levels to very low, only 54 grams. That's the lowest I've seen anyone have. I'm not making any health claims that you need to be that low, but I have managed to decrease my visceral fat to very low levels by manipulating certain dietary components and exercise components. Check out my full video on how I achieved that and what are some of the additional strategies to decrease visceral fat.