There's a very interesting relationship between height, growth hormone, and longevity that I wanted to talk about. Let's start with one of the biggest humans in history. Andre the Giant was seven foot four inches or two hundred and twenty four centimeters tall, who weighed five hundred and twenty pounds or two hundred and thirty six kilos. He was a giant quite literally because of suffering from a genetic condition called gigantism that made him produce excessive amounts of growth hormone. This made him grow and he had enormous hands and feet which is called acromegaly. Growth hormone plays an important role in growth and development during puberty and childhood. Growth hormone stimulates a production of IGF one that then mediates bone growth, muscle mass, and makes you grow. How much growth hormone and IGF one you're exposed to during development determines your overall height. How you respond to this surge is influenced by genetics and childhood nutrition. However, how much growth hormone and IGF one you're exposed to during developmental years has also been seen to determine the organism's lifespan, and producing less growth hormone results in longer life in mice. In humans, acromegaly is associated with a higher risk of cancer, heart disease, and overall mortality. People with acromegaly have a two fold higher mortality risk compared to the general population. Andre didn't live for very long. He died at the age of 46 to congestive heart failure due to his enlarged heart from acromegaly called cardiomegaly. There's also the opposite condition of insufficient growth hormone and IGF one production during developmental years, which is called Laeron syndrome. People with Laeron syndrome live average lifespans 70 80 years, but they have a much lower risk of cancer and diabetes than the general population because of low I g f one levels. So you have this very interesting situation where people with excessive growth hormone production live shorter and they get more chronic diseases, especially cancer and heart failure. Whereas people with less growth hormone production or insufficient growth hormone production live longer, and they have less chronic diseases, especially cancer. When it comes to animals, then larger animals like whales and humans typically live longer than shorter animals like mice and dogs. However smaller individuals within species live longer than larger individuals of that species. For example smaller dogs live twice as long as large dogs. While a Great Dane's life expectancy is six to eight years, a Chihuahua's is ten to eighteen years. Larger dogs are also more prone to most of the chronic diseases especially cancer and osteoporosis. But what about humans? Is there any evidence that being shorter and smaller in body weight is beneficial for longevity in humans? In the past, height was a good indicator of socioeconomic status and better living conditions resulting in longer life. This Spanish study saw that in the years 1835 to 1869, men over a hundred and seventy centimeters or five foot seven inches lived seven point six years longer than men shorter than a hundred and sixty centimeters or five foot three inches because height was determined by socioeconomic status and living conditions. The difference in life expectancy disappeared in those born between 1900 to 1939 mostly because living standards and medical care improved for everyone. This 2002 study on baseball players saw that shoulder individuals lived longer even though everyone's life expectancy had increased since the beginning of the twentieth century. As you can see, the shortest baseball players, a hundred and sixty two centimeters or sixty four inches lived longer than those who were a hundred and ninety three centimeters or seventy six inches in the early twentieth century as well as in the end of the twentieth century. Keep in mind that these are all baseball players, and they should have the same access to medical care and finances. There's also a study on US veterans that saw that men who are less than a hundred and seventy five point three centimeters less than five foot eight lived four point ninety five years longer than taller men. Men shorter than a hundred and seventy point two centimeters less than five foot six lived seven point forty six years longer than men over the height of a hundred and eighty two point nine centimeters over six feet tall. Men who weighed less than sixty three point six kilograms less than a hundred and forty pounds also lived seven point seven two years longer than men who weighed over ninety point nine kilograms over two hundred pounds. So yes, there does appear to be an association between height and longevity in humans with people who are shorter than a hundred and seventy five centimeters living longer than people who are taller than that. The reason for that is thought to be because of the association between IGF one levels and growth hormone during developmental years. If you produce less IGF one and growth hormone during development, you will be shorter. Now there are medical ways to counteract that. Children can get growth hormone to grow taller if they show signs that they're not producing enough growth hormone. Lionel Messi is one example of that. But based on the evidence, people who are shorter live longer than the taller individuals. This phenomenon is called antagonistic play atrophy. What enhances fitness early in life may have harmful effects on lifespan later in life and vice versa. Growth hormone and I two one support growth and proper development early in life. But later in life, they increase the risk of cancer and mortality. The reason antagonistic pleiotropy exists is because evolution doesn't care how long you live. It doesn't care about your maximum lifespan. Evolution only cares about short term reproductive success so you can carry on your genes to the next generation. That's why what favors short term survival in the reproductive years and developmental years might not necessarily be optimal for maximum lifespan. There is evidence for antagonistic pleiotropy in humans as well. This study on 276,000 UK individuals saw that individuals with higher polygenic scores for reproduction have lower survivorship to age 76. Basically, people with higher genetic reproductive traits are less likely to survive until the age of 76. Those with a low score are the most likely to live past 76, at least in this cohort of people. Now the practical takeaway of this is limited because you can't control your genetics and you can't control your height past your reproductive years. But there might be a lesson you can take away regarding age of one and your risk of mortality. Age of one has an element of antagonistic pleiotropy because it supports growth during puberty and development, but it can increase the risk of cancer later in life. Age of one peaks in puberty and declines with age, but high age of one later in life is associated with cancer, heart disease, and a higher risk of mortality. What it means is that very high I g one levels throughout your life might shorten your lifespan and increase the risk of cancer. Indeed, high I g one levels in the general population haven't seem to be associated with a higher risk of cancer, heart disease, and all cause mortality. However, the relationship is u shaped with both low and high levels being associated with increased risk. The lowest risk for cancer, cardiovascular disease, and all cause mortality is seen at a 120 to a 116 nanograms per milliliter based on a 2023 meta analysis. The reason high I g of one levels are associated with increased mortality is mostly because of increased risk of cancer. Remember Laeron syndrome? These people have genetically very low I g of one, and they virtually have no cancer or diabetes. The reason why low IGF one below a 100 nanograms per milliliter is seen to be associated with increased mortality is because of frailty, sarcopenia, and bone fractures because IGF one is needed for bone growth. Low IGF one is also often the result of malnutrition or low protein intake, which results in low bone density and low muscle mass. This again increases the risk of frailty and fractures. Another problem is that low IGF one might also increase the risk of neurodegeneration as IGF one is needed for neuronal growth. In humans, low IGF one levels at below a 110 nanograms per milliliter haven't seem to be associated with an increased risk of Alzheimer's disease compared to IGF one between a 120 to a 170 nanograms per milliliter. However, low IGA of one below a 100 nanograms per milliliter is seen to predict exceptional longevity in humans and reaching your nineties, especially in those with a history of cancer. Centenarians, those who live over 100, haven't seem to have a mean IG of one of only 64 nanograms per milliliter, which is very low. However, their IG of one might be low because they're a 100 years old as IG of one declines with age. So it might be a survivorship bias. Alright. Let's make a quick overview. Lower I j one during development tends to result in longer life expectancy in animals. Very tall humans live shorter than less tall humans. Being extremely tall and extremely short, both aren't optimal. But moderate height and moderate weight appear to be associated with the longest life expectancy. Low age of one appears to predict greater survival in humans over the age of 90. Low age of one might increase the risk of neurodegeneration later in life. But it's not clear if these effects can be avoided by avoiding malnutrition. As I said earlier, the practical takeaway is limited because you can't control your height and you can't control your genes, but you can control your IGF one levels, which is a risk factor for heart disease, cancer, and old cold mortality. IGF one levels are higher during youth and early adulthood at around 200 to 400 and they decrease the older you get which is technically a good thing for antagonistic pleiotropy. At age 40 to 60, average I g of one levels are around a 150 to 250 nanograms per milliliter and they drop to a 100 to 200 at the age of 70 to 80. As we saw from the 2023 meta analysis, the lowest risk of cancer and overall mortality is seen at an IG of one of one hundred to one hundred and twenty nanograms per milliliter. However, the optimal IG of one for longevity might be even below a 100. As long as you're not malnourished, you have adequate bone density and adequate muscle mass. I've had somewhat low ajuhone levels for as long as I've measured it over the last eight years, around one hundred nanograms per milliliter. My last result in January was 94 nanograms per milliliter. And the lowest it's been has been 78 nanograms per milliliter. Based on observational studies, an IG of one below a 100 would put me in the higher risk category. But based on the centenarian data, that IG of one would be beneficial for longevity. Having low I g one might reduce my risk of cancer based on the studies. And I do prioritize that because I have a family history of cancer, but it might increase the risk of dementia later in life. We don't know. In my opinion, the increased mortality seen from low I g one comes from frailty and malnutrition, which I don't have a problem with. I have significantly higher muscle mass, muscle strength, and bone density than average people in my age group. I'm also not super tall or heavy. A hundred and seventy seven centimeters and seventy eight to eighty two kilograms which isn't the lowest risk category for height but it's in the middle. Why do I have lower I j one? Maybe it's genetics because like I said it's always been around a 100 but there are some lifestyle factors that do lower I j one. I maintain a lower body fat percentage. I stay around 10% body fat year round. I don't overeat calories. I eat about 2,000 to 2,500 calories. I don't eat an enormous amount of protein. 1.6 grams per kilogram or a 130 grams for me. However, my I ju one has been around a 100 even when I was eating 200 grams of protein in the past. Time restricted eating and elevated fasting lower IGF one because you're spending more time in a fasted state that lowers IGF one. And lastly, I have optimal blood sugar levels and insulin sensitivity thanks to exercise. High blood sugar raises IGF one. So in my opinion, an IGF one around a 100 is optimal for longevity as long as you avoid malnutrition, as long as you avoid low muscle mass and low bone density. It certainly appears to be optimal for minimizing the risk of cancer. If you want to know my full evidence based longevity routine that covers diet, exercise, supplements and more then check out this video.