It really isn't about, oh, zone two versus high intensity interval training. Like, when it comes to health, the amount of physical activity that you need is actually so small to reduce your risk of disease and mortality. Just going from nothing to something drops your risk of mortality by Christy, welcome to the show. Hi, Sam. Thank you for having me. Yeah. You, had a very, interesting paper you published just recently at the the phone online, and, yeah, I wanted to, have you on the show to discuss about the details of that paper. But, maybe you can also give, like, a short background about yourself, you know, how did you come to writing the paper about the zone two cardio? Yeah. So I'm a PhD candidate in the muscle physiology lab at Queen's University. I'm nearing the end. I can see the light at the end of the tunnel. My research is kinda focused. It has a dip couple different focuses, fasted versus fed training. I just finished up a training study, and then the idea of just, like, fuel substrate used during exercise and how that influences adaptations, which kinda gets to zone two and the idea of, like, burning fat to become a better fat burner, which kinda parallels the, like, gusted exercise research and interest in that as well, which, yeah, like, we'll get into the zone two paper, but the real motivation, I guess, behind writing that paper, which for the listeners addresses the claims made around zone two exercise as this optimal intensity for improving our capacity to burn fat by promoting mitochondrial adaptations and thereby supporting better metabolic health because those two, physiological features of the body are associated and linked to our overall health. So if we're exercising in a way that supports those, then we should be supporting our metabolic health. But I guess the the paper really addresses well, does zone two induce those adaptations? Really, that's the question we were asked because online you can literally do a quick Google search, put in zone two in mitochondria, and there'll just be page after page of blogs being like zone two increases mitochondrial content, zone two supports mitochondrial health. Like, there's just a lot of Right. That a lot. In my opinion, there's almost, like, two camps of people. There's, people who are just you only need to do HIT cardio, that zone two is a waste of time. And the other group is, that you need to do only zone two or mostly zone two. So there's rarely, like, this middle ground where you do both, which I think would be the optimal scenario, but, it tends to be in two categories, the two groups of people. Yeah. And I think the conversation is just a bit too polarized, which complicates it because it really isn't about, oh, zone two versus high intensity interval training. It and that's not where I land at all. It really was, like, do I even need zone two? Do we need to be doing zone two? Does it have some sort of unique inherent benefits that you don't get from going into higher intensities? And, I mean, I'll spoil the spoiler. No, like, I'm not under the impression I didn't find any evidence to suggest that we should be doing or prioritizing zone two over higher intensities because you can just get the benefits of on mitochondrial adaptation, our ability to burn fat, those the adaptations that support better fat oxidative capacity are supported with high intensity exercise or higher intensity exercise. I I do kind of, I wanna be deliberate with my language in saying that it's not that it's not HIIT. It's not high intensity interval training that I'm comparing to zone two. It's accum like, the the volume accumulated in higher intensity, so zone three plus. And I think that gets a lot of confusion online is that we think of all steady state exercise as zone two when it's not. It's, like most of our studies that use continuous training. So if you read any papers where you're trying to figure out, like, oh, HIIT versus moderate intensity continuous training, that moderate intensity continuous training abbreviated to MICT, it often falls above zone two. So when we're looking at, like, oh, HIIT versus MICT, it's really HIIT or SIT sprint interval training. So these high super the the intervals, the the intensities that require us to do in small bursts because they're just unsustainable for longer durations. If we're comparing the interval training to continuous training, it's often, okay, we're comparing zone three, maybe even four continuous training to zone five plus and just those intense training. So I think, part of the confusion is that all continuous training is being grouped as zone two when zone two has a very clear definition. It's demarcated by our lactate threshold or our gas exchange threshold, so we can use ventilatory, our ventilation to kind of indicate our it's linked to our lactate threshold, so but, online, lactate threshold is commonly the demarcation for what is considered zone two. So zone two just I guess we should define it right from the get go, is the zone just below our lactate threshold. So as intensity increases as if we're sitting on a bike and every few minutes the intensity increases, we'll and we're measuring our blood lactate, we should, lack blood lactate will stay at a pretty low, maybe just above our resting level, maybe like literally 0.1, 0.2 above our resting level for a couple stages and then as intensity increases, we'll see this gradual incline and then we'll hit a certain threshold, which is considered our first lactate threshold, where we jump about one to 1.5 above our resting level, millimolars. And, there's different definitions for lactate threshold within the literature, but in our lab, we consider the two millimolar mark as lactate threshold. So zone two is typically defined as just below, so within, like, the 1.7 to two millimolar range would be we're we're we're able to, engage in continuous exercise for probably up to like three hours, three, four hours without our lactate budging, it's a very low intensity, but if we go above that and we start increasing intensity, then there's more of an exponential increase until we hit our second lactate threshold, which then just skyrockets if you increase your duration above our lactate threshold too. And and what is the, like, a heart rate zone usually for zone two? Yeah. I actually can't remember the exact percentages that people use, because that's not where we're going. 60 to 70% Yeah. And that's that. What I've seen typically. But some people might use 75 as well. So I guess somewhere around there. Yeah. I guess. But it's all a bit, like, arbitrary without, I guess, using Without the lock tape. Yeah. Active. Yeah. Without lock tape. Gotcha. Yeah. So what what did you then find? You you kind of spilled the beans of the main findings of of the study that you don't get unique mitochondrial adaptations from zone two that you wouldn't get from high intensity exercise or interval training. So, how did you, you know, come to that conclusion and, what are some, like, maybe other major findings? Yeah. And I guess to start is that we don't have a ton of training studies that actually prescribe sublactate threshold. So in order to conduct this review so this is a narrative review. We didn't do a systematic approach, but we did try to find as many studies that fit the criteria of zone two as we could. And, we def we definitely struggled to find training studies or even acute studies, that prescribed below lactate threshold that would so we had to interpolate using different definitions, so percentages of work rate peak or work rate max. I we might have used a heart rate zone. I actually can't remember. And then definitely lactate and gas exchange threshold. And our first finding or takeaway is that we just don't have a lot of research looking at zone two training. So the whole idea and I guess, like, what perpetuates the message is based, in our opinion, is based on cross sectional observational data in elite athletes who spend a ton of time in zone two. So they do a ton of low intensity training, and 20% of their training is spent at high intensity. So there's polarized training for any endurance listener out there, would be familiar with eightytwenty or polarized training where 80% of your time's in zone 20% at high intensities, and not much time spent in those zones three to four. And so the idea that, I guess, the what's been conflated is that, oh, look, they elite athletes have super high fat oxidation, they have lots of functioning mitochondria, and they perform well, and they also spend a lot of time in zone two. So zone two must be supporting those outcomes when if we're we're a molecular lab, so we think about things very mechanistically and what physiology drives a certain outcome, an expected outcome, and then that should support function over time. And in theory, if we think about zone two, it actually the theory behind zone two and how it would support mitochondrial adaptations doesn't it there's a mismatch. So the way mitochondrial there's one primary mechanism that drives mitochondrial adaptations is through AMPK or AMP Kinase, which is activated by, metabolic stress. So an accumulation of AMP or ADP, and that occurs when we reach intensities where we just can't meet ATP demand through aerobic metabolism or fat oxytocin, metabolism. So we start turning on glycolysis, we start breaking down glycogen, and we start relying heavily on carbohydrates. And that's basically a sign that we are accumulating those metabolites because as though those are also the metabolites that activate glycogen breakdown. And zone two exercise compared to higher intensities is, we don't we don't rely heavily on glycogen. We do actually burn glycogen in zone two, which I was shocked, little bit surprised about because we think of it as, like, oh, basically all of our energy is coming from fat, but we I uncovered during this review that we actually do burn glycogen. It just takes hours of exercise versus a very short duration of high intensity. But I'm really, blabbering and not getting to the your question, which was what did I find? So, again, just recapping that, there's not many studies on zone two. And then secondly, that we have very mixed evidence for supporting mitochondrial adaptations and the supporting fat oxidative outcomes, but specifically for mitochondria, like, we do we do have evidence that signaling, signaling pathways are activated that would we would expect induced mitochondrial biogenesis or improved mitochondrial capacity, but that doesn't always occur and it's certainly not optimal when we compare it to higher intensities. So this idea that we must stay in zone two and we shouldn't go into higher intensity zones because now we're not burning fat and we're, basically negating those benefits that we would get by staying in zone two, that is not supported by evidence. If anything, we have much stronger evidence to support the use of intensity, which comes back to just the theory because intensity is what accumulates those metabolites that turn on the signaling pathways that lead to the outcome that we're actually trying to achieve. Mhmm. So I'll stop there and let you intervene. Did you did you also, look at, like, more the outcome based things like VO2max or some other health outcomes or say something like that? So, I mean, the primary purpose of this paper was to just address claims around mitochondria and fat. Mhmm. However, we did add in a small section on VO two max, cardio respiratory fitness, because at the end of the day, zone two is promoted to the general public, to support better health. But we do have much stronger evidence to support the use of or the to support VO two max in predicting our mortality or all cause our mortality risk, than we do our ability to burn fat and our mitochondrial content. So those things are linked, of course, and I still care like I'm a big proponent of caring about our mitochondrial health and our ability to burn fat, but we have much stronger evidence to to care about VO2 max which we know is intensity. The intensity is very important for driving improvements in VO two max. So if we're exercising for health, I at the end of this paper, I'm under the impression that we should be prioritizing intensity and that doesn't mean only hit intervals and killing ourselves. I think that it's more about accumulating volume at intensity. So Right. When when we compare mixed studies or those modern intensity continuous training to high intensity training or sprint interval training, a lot of literature would support the use of HIIT and SIT, if we're comparing just especially based on time spent exercising, you get a better bang for your buck. But modern intensity continuous training is a bit like, we can improve our VO two max to similar extents. It's just that I don't think you would be doing that in zone two. Like, I think accumulating volume zone three plus, and then using HIIT and SIT where appropriate and however much you can rec like, the amount of volume you can accumulate that you can recover from, that's what we should be focusing on. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices, which are the bond charge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes. They do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin antiaging, hormone optimization, pain management, and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes, especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the Bond Charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most regular Therapeuticers don't have the right wavelengths of light, which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Boncharge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research, and they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code SIIM, s I I m, for a 15% discount. You you mentioned the pro athletes, they tend to spend the most of their time in zone two actually instead of the high intensity zones, and they, you know, have the highest VO two maxes, in the world still, like cross country skiers and cyclists, etcetera. So is it the total volume that they just do so much zone two that they reach a higher VO two max because of that? Whereas the average person, if they do hit once a week, right, then that's not enough volume to accumulate to cause those VO2 max adaptations that, the pro athlete, you know, they spend, like, something like ten hours a week in Zone 2 or even more than that. So they spend an enormous amount of time while training, so this massive volume is what drives their high VO2 max, whereas for the average person, they just don't accumulate that much volume to reach such high levels of VO2 max with, you know, everyday regular training protocol. Right. And I wanna just disclaim that we don't know why athletes do a ton of zone two training. Like, that's I'm just speculating, but they if you if your training volume is twenty hours a week, and 80% of that zone two, but 20%, so four hours of that being spent at high intensities, that's still way more volume than what the someone following the physical activity guidelines doing a hundred and fifty to three hundred minutes of exercise per week. That's still way more volume. So it could be that the the VO two the high VO two max, the high mitochondrial content, etcetera, etcetera of elite athletes is driven through those high intensities. And the 80% in Zone 2 is I mean, we don't know what it's doing. I'm not saying that it's not doing anything, but it I mean, there's a chance that it's not. Like, it's, we don't have that experimental data Right. To suggest that that's actually driving improvement some of the improvements, and it's not all just coming from that still a large volume at high intensities and I think we we just can't attribute based on cross sectional data. Yeah. Well, I think the athletes might do it for the lower risk of injury and, lower intensity because it would be pretty impossible or it's gonna lead to overtraining. If you do, you know, ten, twenty hours a week of high intensity training, it's gonna lead to quite severe overtraining given in athletes. So they do the zone two to accumulate extra volume at no cost to recovery. So it's very, I guess, stress free or doesn't cause that much physical damage to the muscles as zone two. So you can, yeah, do zone two for hours without necessarily getting tired Oh, okay. Without necessarily getting exhausted or, exhausting your central nervous system. I think maybe that's part of the reason. Yeah. And so, like, recovery is, like, I'm happy that you mentioned that just because yeah. There's the the cost of zone two is very low compared to, higher intensities. It's just in order to do enough volume at high intensities that you now require zone two because you just can't do enough, I just don't think that members of the general public are coming close to that volume at higher intensities to even require that low intensity because they've just accumulated so much volume that they can't recover from more in high intensity. Right. Yeah. And I guess, like, walking is a good example of this. Just because walking isn't gonna increase your VO2 max doesn't mean you shouldn't walk. Or, if you if you if someone you know, because you can make the argument that, okay, if you exercise two hours a day, then you don't need to walk any more than, let's say, 3,000, 4,000 steps per day. Yeah. Yeah. Because you're getting the metabolic adaptations and the health benefits from this high intensity exercise, but probably walking more is still kinda good for you in other aspects. Yeah. And, like, there might be tons of other benefits to zone two training. I guess, like, I don't even I don't have an issue with people engaging in zone two training or promoting it. I have an issue with promoting things based on on on something that lacks evidence. Is there any, like, a threshold of, volume someone needs per week to reach positive adaptations with the high intensity or zone two? But zone two is obviously gonna be higher the threshold, but is there any threshold? Yeah. That's a that's a good question. So I don't think we have the optimal prescription. Well, I don't think I know we don't have, like the optimal prescription for inducing mitochondrial adaptations, but there was a 2018 systematic review, they've used like 56 training studies and the conclusion of that paper suggests that we we wouldn't even expect improvements in increased mitochondrial content or improvements in respiratory capacity so that's typically how we measure mitochondrial function. And we wouldn't expect that at a threshold of sixty percent of work rate max which probably falls above zone two for most people. And I guess I can mention this here in that I measure lactate thresholds essentially every day and it they are surprisingly low. So an individual, a recreationally active, healthy, 20 year old university student will have a lactate threshold of, like, 60 to 70 watts, which is which is very, very light intensity. And so say that's on a bike. And as soon as so as soon as they started, like, light jogging, they would be potentially above zone two. So zone two is extremely light exercise. So honestly, I don't even know if people think they're doing zone two. They are most likely above, to be honest. But to say to back to your question about, like, this threshold of of volume, I don't know the volume threshold, but I would say that there is potentially an intensity threshold for which you wanna be above. And I don't mean to say this to, like, belabor my point against zone two, but I do think it's just accumulating volume above zone two. Like, I personally would I would try and accumulate volume zone three plus and using intensity just to because it's time spent near VO two max. So spending as much time as you can near your VO two max to try and push your VO two max up. And then when it comes to lactate threshold, so if you wanna increase your zone two, like, be able to work out at a higher intensity without accumulating lactate, I also believe based on what the studies that I've come across that you you wanna work out, you wanna exercise above your lactate threshold to kind of pull it up instead of trying to like balloon below it and try and push it up. Mhmm. So like giving yourself that stimulus in higher intensities to tell your body to adapt, by turning on and activating these signaling pathways, by pushing you beyond your capacity, kinda like resistance training if we were to, like, make a metaphor parallel. You You wanna go to fatigue almost. Well, yeah. With resistance training, like, we know that you can do light reps at or, light weight at high reps or low reps at high weights. It's just getting close to failure is the important part. And I think that we can kind of parallel that with our metabolism when we are looking at endurance training adaptations and that we wanna push beyond our capacity so that we tell our body to adapt and so that the next time that challenge is less of a like, like, we could accumulate less metabolic stress, if that makes sense. So I don't know the optimal volume, but I would say that accumulating as much volume above zone two, that you can recover from. So I don't know what that number looks like for individuals, but the amount the volume the recoverable volume spent at intensity is is what I'd say, which is not like a very prescriptive answer, but, is something that so, like and you can listen to your body. Like, you know, if if I do, like intervals on the bike day in and day out, I know that I'm tired and my legs are fatigued like I I know that I can't I I know when I can't do it again, which I think people inherently, they can listen to their body and maybe they'll do something else, may maybe they'll do thirty minutes of just steady state at a lower intensity. So I think that we're kind of overcomplicating it when it comes to prescription, and and I think you're gonna get the best bang for your buck by prioritizing intensity and just trying to accumulate as much volume that you can recover from. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. I also saw on, Twitter, the you replied to Steven Steven Manganese's post about, he posted another study about, VO2 max and some capillary adaptations with also some systematic review and meta analysis. And in there, what this his point was that initially in the first few weeks, the high intensity training results in higher VO2 max, but after in a longer time frame, so like months, the, endurance training, lower intensity training catches up and it might even exceed the, your two max. And the problem with that was that, you know, in my opinion, that there's not enough long term high intensity studies that actually last for once and months, whereas they're usually much shorter term. And, but from the graph, the trend was that the endurance training was resulting in higher VO2 max and event or, like, initially, the high intensity group was higher VO2max, but after a while, in a few months, the endurance training exceeded that. So did you see I because I you replied to that post, but did you see the study itself? Yeah. And like you said, it's the problem with comparing the endurance training group in that that analysis, to the hit and sprint interval groups is that, yeah, we don't have long term studies that match the duration of those endurance training studies. And so, like, the conclusion that people draw from that is that, oh, endurance training, we get better or the same I I don't know if it was I think they were the same results. It's just that it took longer for those to be realized in the insurance training group. But we're comparing, like, like, longer week duration of endurance training to short duration hit studies and then and then saying that, oh, it just takes a longer time, but we get better results or the same results with endurance training, continuous training studies. But we can't draw that conclusion because it's not that the benefits of hit plateau at six weeks or eight weeks however long the longest, HIT study was. It's just that we don't have the training studies that go longer. So who knows? Maybe they do keep increasing and they surpass the endurance training group. So we can't we definitely can't draw conclusions from that study to say that endurance training results in better adaptations. It just takes longer. I mean, who knows? It might be true, but we definitely we can't say that based on Right. On that study. And another massive flaw with interpretating that as, oh, we should be doing zone two, is that that endurance training group that is compared to the high intensity interval training and the sprint interval training is anything below lactate threshold two, which is, an intensity far above our lactate threshold one, which would tell us where zone two is. And so I after trying to find zone two papers, I would hedge my bets saying that that endurance training category includes mostly zone three plus continuous training. So like I said at the beginning, we're probably comparing sprint interval training, HIIT, and continuous training in zone three or zone four, which kinda just goes back to my initial message of, like, do continuous training, but don't worry about doing it in zone two. If anything, do it in zone three or zone four and, maybe you'll only have to do thirty minutes of exercise and not two hours in zone two to get to the same endpoint type thing. Like, we can recover. We're members of the general public, which I would like, if you're not competing at a high level, like, cyclist or runner, someone who's accumulating twenty plus hours of volume a week, if you're working out, like, five, six, seven hours a week, it probably is hard to, like, you're you're probably able to recover from your zone three plus volume, in in order to even consider adding in more volume at zone two, if that makes sense. So, yeah, the the big the big thing big flaws with drawing conclusions in favor to try and support a zone two argument with that specific paper is that the endurance training group is likely above zone two, and we don't have HIT studies that match the duration of the the continuous training group. And then they also so they had capillary density, and then they had mitochondrial content as well, in those in that paper. And then another thing about that paper is that one of the figures and one of the takeaways is that they split up based on train, like, training status. So it was untrained, so sedentary studies that studied, these outcomes in sedentary individuals, individuals who are just recreationally active, and then those who are considered trained. And in, for my increasing mitochondrial content, the more trained you are, the more you require intensity to induce those adaptations. So there's actually no change in mitochondrial content, based on one of their figures in in the trained group. So the trained group who engaged in endurance training, there was no increase in mitochondrial content, whereas in the HIT and the sprint interval group, there was. So that's also an interesting takeaway. Suggesting that we actually the more trained you are, the more you require intensity to keep inducing adaptations, and that's actually the conclusion of another systematic review. It's quite old now. It's in, like, the nineties, where they looked at it was a systematic review looking at training intensity and improvements, increases in lactate threshold. And lactate threshold is an indicator of our fat oxidative capacity just because we have high fat oxidative capacity. We shouldn't be relying on carbohydrates till later in exercise and thus our lactate threshold is higher. So we can use that as a kind of a indirect marker of fat oxidative capacity and it's also related to mitochondrial content and function. But the results from another systematic reviews also showed that in trained individuals, intensity is important, is a driver of improvements in lactate threshold. So, again, I do I do think based on, like, piecing together all this all the evidence that we really do need to pull our lactate threshold up, instead of trying to push it from below it, if I can Right. I don't know if that makes sense. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. And does it need to be so, like, when we're speaking of max heart rate, so is it a 100% max heart rate or 80% is enough, or is there any threshold there? Yeah. I I I I don't we don't prescribe in the lab based on heart rate. Mhmm. I'm pretty sure high intensity is defined as, like, 80% plus and then anything of of VO two max, which Right. Not, Yeah. I guess in in the real world, people can't do the lactate test. Right. Right. Need to measure it with their max heart rate. But 80% is usually what's recommended for the intervals, interval training. Yeah. 80% and above. So it's gonna be 90%, you know, like, most cases. Yeah. So if you're pushing above 80% of your max heart rate and doing intervals at that, then that would be considered high intensity interval. And then if you're going all out, that's when it's become sprint interval training. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Well well, looking at Steve's content, then I think he's a proponent of doing mix training a lot, so changing it up a lot. So doing sprint interval training, doing, HIT, doing zone two, doing all different types of threshold trainings, etcetera. So he's he's a big proponent of, I guess, you know, changing up a little bit all the things and, following different protocols. He he's a if I'm not mistaken, he is a more more endurance realm as an athlete himself and a coach. So, he he he doesn't, I guess, you know, do those protocols with the general population. He's more for endurance athletes specifically. Yeah. And I think that's, like, another just thing that's being conflated in that our paper addresses the general public. Like, I'm coming from this as, like, a consumer of health longevity content online and basically just doing a robust fact check of like are these claims supported by evidence and I would probably put most people in the camp of general public. We all have full time jobs mostly. I don't think anyone like, a lot of the people that are consuming this content, they're not professional athletes. They're not looking for advice through podcasts probably. They have coaches. So I I really do come at this from the perspective of people within the general public who are maybe following the physical activity guidelines and are now seeing that they should be doing low intensity exercise because they they need it for their mitochondria. And those are the those are the claims that we're addressing and I'm those that's where we found very, very, very limited evidence to support and in contrast would, our conclusion is that, in in fact, we should be prioritizing intensity if we're trying to optimize those adaptations to exercise. Mhmm. What about too much volume for for intensity? So there are quite a lot of studies on the general population that excessive volume with high intensity training is associated with increased mortality risk and, heart disease risk. Obviously, for for athletes, they might sacrifice those things, but, for the general population, the mortality is a big concern or, longevity, benefits. So is there upper thresholds for how much intensity should you do? Like, because, you know, ten hours of high intensity training is clearly too much for, the general population, and too little is also obviously not enough. So is there any sweet spot of one to two hours, three hours, or one and a half hours? Right. Right. One, I'm not familiar with that literature showing that intensity negatively is associated with, There's volume. Like, if you it's it's along the lines of over 400 minutes per week along those lines. Athlete population? No. It's a general population. Oh, okay. I'm not familiar with that. But I will answer this from just, like, speculating somewhat. And, again, I think this I'm probably just am repeating myself and that, like, the amount of intensity that you will accumulate will probably just be what you can subjectively recover from and Mhmm. That I think that's gonna be based on an individual like an individual basis because if someone's trying to accumulate the same amount of volume as someone else who only has five hours a night to sleep and doesn't prioritize, good nutrition around their training. We're gonna recovery is supported by things outside of exercise. And so if we're not repleting glycogen and going so say I do a HIIT training session at night, I don't adequately consume carbohydrates and then I wake up the next morning and I try and do another interval session, I'm not fully recovered from that night before because I didn't replete my glycogen, so my performance is gonna be sacrificed likely the the next morning, and if I had a poor sleep, even worse. So our recovery is gonna be based on the things that we do outside of training, and that's gonna probably dictate how much volume we can accumulate at high intensities and this is where it comes back to like, you know you know if you're like getting symptoms of overtraining. Like, if you can't perform, if your legs are absolutely crushed and you, like, can't work out at that intensity that you could a couple days prior, but then again, we do have long term hit trials in individuals with cardiac or in cardiac rehab. We have hit trials that have gone on in our department here in individuals with insulin resistance, type two diabetes, like metabolic syndrome type, categories of people who come in, I don't know, three to, five times a week and are able to do, like, following physical activity guidelines and keep on repeating intense exercise. And but we also have studies where they've tried to actually overtrain people by doing two a days. So a HIIT session in the morning, HIIT session in the evening, and those are three weeks long, which, I mean, three weeks is a blip in someone's life, but they're they actually never reached the state of overreaching. So they would test them each week and make sure that they weren't getting symptoms of overreaching, and they were fine. Up until the three week mark, they never had to change anything in the study because at all every single participant was able to withstand the two a day hit sessions. So I do I do think that it just is based on the individual. And like I said also, it's just like we don't have to be killing ourselves every day. That's definitely not my, like, my takeaway or my message. It really is just, like, do you need zone two? Like, I just don't I think I'm trying to differentiate from, oh, then the answer is hit from, oh, you don't actually need to be deliberately doing zone two. And I should have just scanned this from the beginning in that zone two is better than nothing. I if someone is going from nothing to zone two, I kudos. I am so happy. However, if someone's going from loving their thirty minute runs or bike sessions or hit sessions and they can do that day in and day out and they feel great and they're recovering good, but now they're seeing messaging online that they need to be doing zone two. So now they're subbing in zone two for some of their higher intensity days. I think that's where that that could be a disservice, and they might be now just blunting what they could be getting out of their exercise boat because they're buying into the messaging that they need to be doing zone two when I I don't see the evidence to support that. Yeah. I guess the takeaway should be that you should follow a workout plan that helps you to achieve your physical fitness goals and, your these physical activity requirement goals for the week and, without damaging your health, without damaging your mental health or social life or something like that. And, it can involve, obviously, many different types of exercise, lifting weights, hit zone two, etcetera, depending on which ones you prefer and what are your goals. And I think that takeaway should also be that just because zone two isn't superior for mitochondrial adaptations to hit, then, that is useless or that you shouldn't do it. Like, if someone likes to do it, again, like I said, then they should do it, and we have to look at it in the context of the entire workout plan. So for me, if, like, I do zone two just because if I were to add a lot of hit to to my workout plan, then I wouldn't be able to recover from my resistance training sessions. So I do the zone two because it's low intensity and lower effort, and it doesn't interfere with the resistance training goals and is not going to cause extra exhaustion to my central nervous system so I can recover better for my resistance training sessions. And I might do, like, a HIIT session once a week or once every two weeks, but my aerobic exercise is, with, zone two on the days that I don't do, resistance training. So, like, it depends a lot on the context of, the entire workout plan. Right. No. A 100%. And, like, when it comes to health, the amount of physical activity that you need is actually so small to reduce your risk of disease and mortality. Like, just going from nothing to something drops your risk of mortality by, like, sixty percent or something crazy. Mhmm. And it's, like, the baseline level of fitness that you need that's associated with longevity or health is is very minimum, and anyone who's physically active is probably in that category. And getting and, like, I'll I guess to tie it all together is that all of these different protocols and things are for for individuals like us who just kinda, like, care about health optimization. Looking at the hard outcomes is gonna be worth more than trying to exercise in a way that's buying into a certain mechanism. Mhmm. Right. Mhmm. It like, are you how is your glucose tolerance? Tolerance? Like, how how do you feel? How are you sleeping? Like, all of these things that are markers of health, are the are the outcomes that we're trying to achieve instead of trying to, like, convince ourselves that we're doing something for particular to activate a certain pathway. And so, like, the outcome is health. So exercising in a way that supports better health is is, what we should be doing. And I think that there's multiple ways to get those endpoints. Yeah. And with these exercise studies, what I've seen or what you also shared is that there isn't actually a lot of clear conclusions about this because limited studies and not a lot not enough long term studies or there even with HIT, there's, you know, a million different HIT protocols you could do. You could do thirty second intervals. You could do four minute intervals. You could do anything in between. So, and as many rounds as, you know, you could imagine. So there's not even, like, a standardized HIT protocol, so it's hard to, I guess, with the limited data, it's hard to be as as, you know Prescriptive. Conclusive conclusive about, these things. In similar with diet, like, you wouldn't be able to make a lot of very conclusive definite answers about the best diet in the world because it's very almost impossible to study that long term, but you can make some general conclusions, in some directions, that, we have information about. But we don't have, yeah, a 100% perfect, conclusive answer in both the exercise realm and the diet realm. Yeah. I think that there's a lot similar to diet, it's just like over complicated messaging and adherence is so important when it comes to exercise. Like diet, like, we eat every day so we have to make decisions around that, but exercise is something we have to add into our life. It's not just, like, structured into our daily routine, like, we have to be deliberate about exercise and so finding something that someone can actually do on a consistent basis is probably the most important important factor. So, yeah, it is complicated. Yeah. Did you get any inspiration or any changes to your own HIT protocol? Did you find any specific interval, duration, or frequency that pointed you you you liked from the study or you have changed? No. I just exercise for fun. So I actually enjoy just, like, going to exhaustion, which is probably not common. But I will say that doing the HIIT protocol, so we often see, like, the four by four protocol within the literature or woman and on woman and off, those type of intervals. Doing them in the lab has been very, I guess, eye opening and has taught me new tolerance and, my ability to, I don't know, withstand discomfort has my tolerance has just gone up since actually doing them. And, like, HIIT is hard. It's it's supposed to be hard, but actually exposing yourself to that discomfort over time like it you know what to expect, you you feel really good after, so the only thing I guess I've changed is just being less intimidated by HIIT intervals, especially on the bike, but I haven't changed anything because I exercise for fun. Like, I already I know that I'm gonna move my body most days. I don't really follow a structured I don't follow a structured plan. I just like, whatever sounds fun is what I do, and I I my, like, interpretation of the literature is that that is what's important, something that I'm going to sustain over time. I'm really I'm it's easy for me to go hard. I enjoy it, and so I'm not concerned about sticking to a certain hit protocol. But I will say that doing the four minute intervals was eye opening to what I can sustain. And so that that's the the only thing that has changed is my my psychology around exercise. Right. Yeah. The four minutes intervals are kinda brutal. Yeah. And, you need to kind of graduate up from shorter ones, like one minute first, then two minutes, three minutes, and four minutes. And I think one misconception as well about this is that, you know, you wouldn't be able to sprint for four minutes straight. Yeah. So it's not actually that you're sprinting the entire time at max speed. You are at this 80% or 90% max heart rate, which isn't full on sprinting. It's something like 80% of your full speed. So you sustain that speed for four minutes. That's where the adaptation comes from the you're very close to your max threshold with your VO two max and your max heart rate, so you're staying there, sub threshold, and, doing it what I've seen is that the longer intervals actually are a bit superior to shorter ones, but it might be again that you accumulate more volume from longer intervals. Right. And, if you do more rounds as well, you get more volume that ultimately drives the biggest adaptation. Yeah. Do you know if they've ever compared, like, twenty one minute intervals to four by four? Like, I don't know what if it they might end up I saw one meta analysis that showed, shorter ones, so less than thirty seconds to over two minutes. And the over two minutes was superior, but thirty seconds is very short period of time, and you're not getting really that much volume from that. So I think the volume would mon probably matter the most. If you might do, I don't know, 20 rounds of thirty second intervals, but you do five rounds of two minute intervals, then maybe the thirty second interval is better, but they didn't study that specifically. But Yeah. I've never longer intervals tend to accumulate more volume, I think. That's the reason. Right. Right. Right. Yeah. Well, they're also definitely, subjectively, I would say they're harder. Hold Yeah. For sure. Holding a higher output for that long is hard. Yeah. We can start to wrapping up as well. So, you know, obviously, there was a lot of, unanswered questions still and a lot of unanswered as, you know, studies, to be done. Are you planning to do something, in the future on this topic? Well, I'm nearing the end of my PhD, so I don't now I'm not I'm past my study design phase, which is kind of unfortunate because your interest change over the course of four years. But I've wrapped up my fasted versus fed training study. So I had a fasted group and a carbohydrate fed, and I'm looking at the adaptations to hit and seeing if they're influenced by carbohydrate availability. So that literally starting wet lab stuff today to look at the muscle samples. So that was a biopsy study, which is which is awesome, being Being in a lab where we can take biopsies because we can really get to the molecular underpinnings of adaptations to training. So hopefully, I'll have results for that to share in the near future. I'm still blinded to the intervention, so I actually have no idea what Okay. What anything is. And then I'm wrapping up my second study where I'm looking at whether zone two, so someone's lactate threshold, is that a functional test for assessing mitochondrial content? So biopsy and lactate threshold and looking at mitochondrial content and an individual zone two lactate threshold, and seeing if if you could run a lactate threshold, is that a way to predict or tell us about mitochondrial content? Because they are related, so we should be able to clinically maybe running an, a lactate threshold is an a way to assess someone's mitochondrial content. So I'm just wrapping that up now as well. Okay. Sounds good. Yeah. We're looking forward to it. And my before I ask last question, where can people learn more about you and your work? Yeah. I guess I'm most active on Instagram. So my handle is just christy storstruck, which I hope will be linked because I'm not selling that one out. And, I am on Twitter as well and LinkedIn, but, Instagram is probably where I'm most active. Yeah. We'll put the links in the show notes. And my last question is, what's this, one piece of advice or habit that you wish you adopted sooner? I think realizing that life is not that serious. Your problems are probably not as good as you think. Yeah. That's changed my perspective on all things that bother me because you have that perspective, then nothing can bother you. Yeah. It's not that serious if you do zone two or hit as long as you exercise. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. Well, yeah. Well, that was great to talk with you and, yeah, looking forward to your future work. Yeah. This was awesome. Thank you so much for having me on and it's very cool. I've been following you from the beginning, so very awesome to have this conversation. Yeah. Well, thank you. Thank you. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.