Having a six pack is like more rare than being a millionaire these days. Having good health is very rare and if that's important to you and you want your partner to have that as well, I don't think I think it should be accepted. So the principles of longevity protocols are all the same. But it's like in the details and the nuance how you implement those. Kyla Barnes Lentz is an entrepreneur and a leading voice in female longevity. She shares her journey on optimizing her health as a woman, fertility, reducing the burden of toxins in the modern world, and using different biohacking technologies. She also has a longevity clinic in Ohio. One of the very interesting things that people might know about you is that, you do you did, like, a health interview for your husband when you started dating with him. So, yeah, can you maybe explain a little bit how did that go? Yeah. I mean, it's become a bit controversial, I will say. Like, I've read some of the comments, and people say, oh my gosh. This is the most unromantic thing I've ever heard of in my life. But it wasn't really like that. So, I mean, you know, this has been, you know, my world for the last, like, you know, six years. I have a clinic. So for me and, you know, you and I chatted about this on my podcast. It's so important to find a partner that aligns with you. Right? Like Yeah. It'd be very difficult to be pursuing longevity and health optimization if I had a husband that wanted to, like, sit on the couch and drink, like, beer and eat chips at the end of the night. You know? Yeah. It would be not a it would not be a match. So Yeah. Exactly. Like, it wouldn't work out anyway. So it's better to come out clear with what our product values and priorities are with health. A 100%. Right? And I think it's it's more acceptable in other areas. Right? Like, if a man works a lot, he's gonna continue working a lot and show that to his future spouse. Right? Like, hey. This is what you're getting yourself into. Yeah. That's kind of how I thought of it. It's it was one of the most important things to me. You know? Like, there were other things, like, faith is super important and morals and but health is huge. So, yeah, I asked him first, I asked him if he had labs of his own because that would kind of indicate whether or not he even cared about his health. Mhmm. Well, first, they did, like, a little Instagram scroll, and I checked out, like, what's going on here. There's, like, working out pictures. I'm like, that's good. He's, like, getting, like, grass fed, grass finished meets the air one. I'm like, okay. That's good. Mhmm. So I figured he'd be open to it, and he was. So he immediately sent me, like, his full physical. Things looked pretty good, but then I was like, hey. Can I send you a bunch of other labs? Are you down to take them? So I sent him so much. I sent him a genetics test, a gut test, total toxic burden test, and he took them immediately, sent them back, and we reviewed them together. They were pretty good. I mean, there were some areas that we were able to optimize. That was really fun, actually, because I think for him, once I helped him get his, like so when we first met, he was on a little bit of testosterone, like tiny, the smallest dosage. But because we wanna have babies, I was like, hey. Do you mind to get off of that? And he's like, yeah. No problem. And so we took his testosterone from about, like, 600 or so up to, like, nine sixteen naturally. Oh. So he was, like, all in after that. He was like, oh, definitely. Let's do it. So, yeah, the lab thing has been controversial, but, you know, I think this should be, like, the future, to be honest with you. Good health, you know, I've read that having a six pack is, like, more rare than being a millionaire these days. You know? So having good health is very rare. And if that's important to you and you want your partner to have that as well, I don't think I think it should be accepted, to be honest. Yeah. I think, you know, that it applies to a lot of other areas. You know, of course, you have people with different, lifestyles, also being together, but, you know, usually people with the same music get together music taste get together. People with same, yeah, health habits get together. So yeah. You know, there should be, like, a filter on some, dating apps. Yeah. I think I think there are, like, some dating apps actually where it's around health. So you can Oh. You can check, I think or at least there should be. You know, there should be some, like, option on dating apps that check health, like, be healthy or something like that. Value health. Yeah. So yeah. Well, on that note, do you do you know this Instagram account, Carnivore Aurelius? Yeah. So we ended up my husband was apparently, like, going to Carnivore Aurelius' Instagram and, like because he was intentionally trying to find a wife. He wanted a wife for, like, a long time, but he just had a really long list of things that he wanted that person to have. So he would go, like, and write a comment and see so carnivore really is kinda hesitating yet. We kinda met through that as well because, like Okay. We were both connected to him, which is kinda funny. Yeah. That's interesting. But what got you into what what made you wanna be healthy yourself? Yeah. I mean, it was kind of like a slow build. I didn't grow up healthy at all, like, just a standard American diet. Like, my mom was giving me, like, Pop Tarts, like, things that I don't even see as food now. So when I started studying nutrition in college, it was just like a little bit. You know? I was like, oh, let me just change how I'm eating. But the real desire was that I didn't really come from a lot. And I knew that in order to build a life, like, that I wanted, I was gonna have to work a lot truly. So I became an entrepreneur at the age of, like, 17 years old. I've always had my own company. And I knew that I was gonna have to feel amazing and, like, upgrade my biology per se to be able to work as much as I wanted to work to build the life that I wanted, which I now have, which is exciting. So that was the first thing. I was just like, let's change how I'm eating a little bit, and then I started to feel better. I got super deep into it about five years ago when I went to go open up a clinic. So, I have a longevity medicine clinic. And when I was thinking about what to offer, I started looking at all these labs that my doctor had never recommended before. So I had never seen a gut test. My doctor never told me to look at, like, the amount of parabens or phthalates or environmental toxins. And my health was, like, great according to my doctors. Right? So but as soon as I started getting some of these labs back, I'm like, oh, I think this can be better. So it was just yeah. It was a build, and I have a very type a personality. I really started to love the fact that you could feel better, like, as you got older. You know? I'm 34 now, and I feel better now than when I was, like, 18 years old. So I'm like, this is amazing. And then I just started to get so educated on the subject. Right? So as you build these medical clinics, you talk to all these doctors and, you know, practitioners, and I'm like, what are you doing that's working? And then we started implementing a lot of that, and then I got this great clinical experience, which was so fun because you you get to see people's lives change. You get to because I would say about fifty percent of the patients that live are wanting to improve lifespan or health span, but the other fifty percent have, like, some chronic illness. They've been to ten, fifteen, 20 doctors, and they can't figure out why they feel horrible. And so those people, you get to put the them through these interventions and protocols, and then you see their life change. That's, like, the most rewarding thing. So Yeah. I got excited about all these different therapies and, the ability to improve health now, but also for the future. Yeah. Because, you know, sometimes people don't care about their health, but if they get sick, they start to care. So it's like, you know, you will care eventually. Yeah. And at that at that point, when you are forced to care about your health, that's the only thing you want. Like, you would, you know, take give away anything just to be healthy. Yeah. Your entire focus just goes to that. And it's so sad because people, unfortunately, like, treat their body like a garbage can, you know, for so long. They just they're like, oh, nothing's happening. It's fine. But it just it's accumulating, and eventually, it's just gonna tip over, and then you're gonna have some sort of chronic disease. So I love the work that you're doing. That's the work I'm trying to do is just say, take care of yourself now when it's easier, when you're younger, and when you haven't developed any chronic disease because it's gonna be so much more difficult to reverse that later. Yeah. So on your podcast, we talked about my grandfather who died to cancer. Do you have any, like, family history of any chronic diseases, or is there something that you're genetically worried about? Actually, no. So my great grandmother is 95. Okay. And she is still living on her own. Wow. And she is still, yeah, just, I mean, enjoying life. So there wasn't anything major. My my parents are both my parents also had me really young. So my mom was, like, 18. My mom was just out here. Mhmm. No one could believe that she was my mom. Everyone was just like, oh, who's your friend? And I'm like, no. This is my mom. So that's good. I didn't have anything like that, but I just knew that I could feel better. And I knew that, like, you know, at one point, I was working, you know, eighty hour weeks, like, for many years in a row. And you can't do that if you're not optimized. If you are not eating the right foods and getting high quality sleep, and it's much more difficult to do that. And I just knew I was gonna have to because I wanted a life that was so beautiful, but I just knew I would have to put in a lot of work to get there. So, no. Not particularly, but it was kind of like my own pursuits, like wanting to see how good can I get so I can achieve all these things? Yeah. Well, if you have a grandma grandma who's so old, you have very high likelihood of, living to 100 as well because the research is something like if your mother or grandmother or someone who lived to a 100 become a centenarian, then the offspring's likelihood of is also, like, a 100% higher than the general population or something like that. So yeah. I love that. And genes are great. I mean yeah. And she by by no means is she doing anything, like, health health related. Yeah. Before I continue on, I'll briefly mention to you about one of my favorite longevity gadgets, which is the point charge infrared sauna blanket. It's a cheaper and more convenient way to take the sauna anywhere at any time. I've talked a lot about the benefits of regular sauna use. I believe taking a sauna regularly is the second best thing for your longevity after exercise. In fact, the sauna mimics a lot of the health benefits of exercise. The sauna is also effective for excreting heavy metals and other chemicals we're exposed to on a daily basis. It's got a rating of 4.9 out of five based on a 176 reviews which is crazy. But I'm not surprised because I'm using the blanket almost every day and it gets the same job done as a regular sauna. Plus, it's easy to clean and you can store it under your bed. Alright. Back to the video. You're also, like, very vocal about, like, male and female, health. So there's, like, a lot of differences that, there are between men and women. Mhmm. So maybe you can elaborate. Like, what are some of, like, the biggest things people miss when it when we're talking about health advice for men and women? Yeah. Absolutely. So when I started all this, you know, the medical literature is essentially for men. Right? So women weren't required to be included in research until, like, the nineteen nineties. You know? So that's, like, as old as I am just in about you too, probably close. So that hasn't been a very long time. So all these, like, longevity protocols and a lot of the research is done on men. So then that information is extrapolated for men. So I was doing a lot of these longevity protocols. Like, let's use caloric restriction as one. Mhmm. We know that that's one of the, best interventions for life extension. Right? So I believe was it a 20 to 30% caloric restriction yielded a 20 to 30% longer lifespan? Right? Yeah. So I was doing all these things. I was implementing the caloric restriction from the research. I was implementing, intermittent fasting, you know, with that. Then I was implementing all the exercise regimes. And at the end of the day, I was watching my biomarkers, like my thyroid and my hormones trend in the wrong direction. So my thyroid was dropping. My hormones were becoming dysregulated. So I really started to, you know, pull the cover back and say, okay. Why is this? I'm doing all of the right things, but for some reason, my biomarkers are trending in the wrong direction. And, I really kinda just put it together. Let's reel it in a little bit. And so I found differences in every single area. So let's, you know, sleep. We know sleep is like the foundation of health. Right? So in the literature, it says that women need about eleven to twenty minutes more sleep than men, which is interesting. What I have found just like n in one study, so I've been blessed enough to be able to go to bed at the same time and wake up with no alarm clock. I have found, especially during specific phases, so like late luteal or early follicular, that's, you know, the bleed phase for women, that I need even about an hour more sleep than, my husband. And if we think about first principles because there's not a lot of medical research, that's what this whole thing that I'm doing is. Right? It's first principles thinking about some of these, really under researched topics like ovarian aging. We'll talk about that in a second. But, so women detox slightly slower than men because we prioritize fat storage, and we have more body fat in general than men. So we detox a little slower. That could be a reason that we need more sleep to detox. And then we're also exposed to more toxins. So we're it's estimated that we leave the house with about double the amount of toxins that men do in the form of personal care products and fragrances and makeups, all these different lotions and stuff that we're putting on and different products. So that could be one reason because we don't really know exactly why women need, more sleep than men, but that's one big difference. So if you're just listening to this, you're like, I'm gonna do a super strict longevity protocol, then being a part of the five AM boys club might not work for you as a woman, you know, because we do need more sleep. So that's something, that's was an interesting finding. Yeah. The and, you know, more stress or more of these, even if they're considered positive stressors, like, too much of anything is also bad for men. Like, you know, there's a lot of men as well who do the 5AM and three hours exercise every day and, calorie restriction, you know, their health is also not in the best shape. At least their hormones would probably, like, quite suboptimal if they were to be natural. But it's it's very unlikely for men to even maintain normal hormone levels with a very stressful and highly physically active lifestyle, not to mention women. So Yeah. Yeah. Because, you know, women are more sensitive. So let's say, you know, you and your wife or me and my husband are both getting into a cold plunge. And let's say, you know, you can do fine at 35 degrees Fahrenheit, and then she gets in, she's going to have a higher cortisol spike faster than you are. So that's another difference. Right? Is these hormetic stressors, which we know and love for improving resilience and increasing our capacity to handle stress, women just need to think about it a little differently. So the principles of longevity protocols are all the same. But it's, like, in the details and the nuance, how you implement those can be either amazing and help you optimize health span, and energy and fertility. You know, fertility is a huge issue right now on both sides of the coin. Right? It's 50% from the man, 50% from the woman. But, hormetic stressors is another one. So I was doing a lot of cold therapy all the time all throughout my cycle. So it was just I was, like, doing caloric restriction and intermittent fasting and trying to be, like, waking up super early, and I was also doing all these hormetic stressors, and it was just way, way, way too much. So, what I have found now, I've kind of optimized my cold therapy protocol. And so I'm doing all of my cold therapy in the first half of my cycle. So this is, like, day one through about day fourteen because we have all this estrogen. And so we can take advantage of that as women, and we can do our hardest. That's when I'm hitting, like, all my PRs. I'm really doing most of my hit training because we know, like, hit training is so good for the mitochondria. And fun fact, but women, the highest density of mitochondria is, like, in the heart, brain, but women also have a massive mitochondrial density in the ovaries, specifically in these oocytes. So I'm always thinking about mitochondrial optimization for that and for fertility also. So that was another big change is changing and reducing the hormetic stressors, timing, duration, and temperature. So I'm keeping my cold plunge. I have a cold plunge up there that we walked past, at about 40 degrees Fahrenheit instead of those super cold temperatures. Right. Because I'm getting the same benefit as my husband, but I can do less time and I can do, warmer warmer temperatures. So, those are a few of the nuances. And then even when it comes to nutrition, you know, being able to optimize your nutrition for your cycle. So we're mostly talking about women, that are the age of, like, your wife and me. So, this is like a child rearing years, maybe, you know, perimenopause. When you get into menopause, it changes a bit because your your hormones are really very stable and they're very low. But, for someone in their childbearing years that is menstruating, you can even optimize your nutrition to your cycle because men, you it's kinda like Groundhog Day. It's like you guys have this twenty four hour cycle of hormones, which is great, but we have to think through everything in, like, days one through 14, then fourteen through 16, and then sixteen through the end. So I'm eating, like, a little bit more grass fed, grass finished red meat in that first week because you're losing iron. So you can supplement with that. We know that women are more insulin sensitive in the first half of the cycle, so during that follicular phase. So that is, something to know because you wanna take advantage of that. You're a little bit less insulin sensitive in the second half of the cycle. So managing blood sugar throughout that cycle can also be really helpful. So those have been, like, a few of the differences. And I would say one of the last differences that's really important to know is this total toxic burden thing. I'm really obsessed with this right now because women are exposed to so many more environmental toxins. So I think if women can start to reduce their total toxic burden, either, you know, you don't have to test if you don't wanna spend money on the test, but, just starting to swap out products. There's a there's a resource called the environmental working group. Mhmm. Great resource. They have something called the Skin Deep database. You could just type in the product that you're using right now. It'll give you a score. You wanna stay in the green zone of toxicity, and you can just start swapping out, you know, products for less toxic products. I mean, here in The US, for sure, regulations are very wide. There's not much regulation at all on what goes in the food or what goes on your skin. But when when you're thinking about your skin, it's essentially like a mouth. You know? It's being absorbed transdermally. Yeah. That's why we even need to shower or or filter our shower water here. So trying to reduce that toxic burden for women, I think, is gonna be really helpful overall to hormone hormone health. Like, a lot of women have these PMS symptoms and these hormonal imbalances. And I think if you can optimize your hormones, you're gonna really just feel so much better. Yeah. Yeah. For men most men, it's just the three in one shower gel Right. That they're exposed to. But, yeah, women have a lot more one. Yeah. The the shampoo, the shower gel, and the conditioner all at once. But but, yeah, it's like a small amount compared to women who, are using different, personal care products and makeup and the things like that. So yeah. Yeah. And even, like, cleaning products. So, you know, women are traditionally exposed to more of them. I know that they're these roles are changing a bit, I suppose. I don't know. My husband doesn't doesn't touch cleaning products. So, I mean, yeah, I think it's just the accumulation, and we're living in an environment as you know. And we were even talking about the differences of, like, where you live in Estonia versus, like, living here in LA. It's vastly different. It's Yeah. The air pollution is really, something to be so depends on where you're at in the world. But if you're here in The US, we know that there's just all sorts of these, you know, known carcinogen and endocrine disrupting chemicals. Like, these microplastics that we now know are in the brain, in the ovaries, in the placenta of babies. Those mimic estrogen. So we see young girls, starting to menstruate earlier ever than ever. We see women entering menopause earlier than ever. So these are things we really need to be thinking about, these, like, estrogen mimicking substances. Yeah. So you're you're planning to get a baby with your husband eventually. How do you, like, prepare for that? Like, because, yeah, like you said, there's a lot of these toxins and microplastics that, you know, have been found to be transmitted from the mother to the baby as well. So how are you, like, preparing yourself? You and your husband, how are you preparing to get, like, the healthiest, with the least microplastics Yeah. They take it. I know. It's it's the whole thing. So, I mean, I wanna preface that, you know, this is what I do professionally, like, for my job. So I don't think anyone everyone needs to do all of this. But Right. For me, I'm trying to optimize every lab. So, of course, just like basic blood work, we want, like, our lipids to look good, our inflammation to be really low, our, you know, insulin and glucose, and all of all of our just basic blood work, we wanna optimize. But then I wanna look at, like, nutrient status. So I do something called a nutri eval. So instead of just guessing, like, what supplement I should take, I literally draw labs, and I look at all these nutrient statuses because we know that once you get pregnant, the baby is just gonna draw so many of those nutrients from you. So, actually, all throughout the pregnancy, I'm I'm excited because I don't think this has ever been done. I'm gonna do an obscene amount of labs, you know, probably every few weeks, like, two to three weeks during pregnancy to see what's going on because we don't even know, which is crazy. It's 2025. We really have no clue what's going on in a woman's body during pregnancy. So I'm gonna be I'm optimizing the Nutrieval, which is the nutrient status test, really optimizing the, the the total tox burn test. So getting those down as low as possible. Because we also know that higher levels of environmental toxins decrease a lab value called AMH or anti mullerian hormone. Mhmm. This is a measurement of your egg reserve as a woman. So it's it's not a perfect measurement, and there is no exact measurement to test fertility until you try to get pregnant. It's like Right. Do you or don't you? But I have gotten all the labs to just see where things are, and I think all women should know their AMH because if it's really low and you're young, that might mean that you either need to do a complete one eighty on lifestyle, but you also might wanna freeze your eggs. You might wanna start trying to get pregnant. Are you familiar with this lab? I don't I've heard about it. The AMH. So, that that's a good one just to have an idea of. But going back to what I'm doing for pregnancy, optimizing gut health, we know that, like, your the mother's microbiome is going to be passed down to the child. So I do a test called the GI effects by Genova, just trying to get that as top tier as possible. Definitely taking, like, a a male and female, prenatal. So we take something called a weanladel. They have a woman's version and a men's version, which is really nice. Loaded with, like, antioxidants and, you know, methylated folate and some of these key nutrients that we need. It's great to know, but there's a three month window for both men and women that you can optimize to as much as possible. So women can optimize their egg quality. Men can optimize their sperm quality. So my husband's doing all this stuff too. So we're looking at his total toxic burn. We're looking at his gut test, his blood biomarkers to also help him detox. We're doing a lot of sauna, so at least minimum four sauna sessions. Since the fires in LA, I'm doing sauna every day now. So really helping to just excrete those toxins, doing a lot of binders. This is really extreme, and I'm only doing it because of the toxins, but I did therapeutic plasma exchange, doing eBU to reduce that toxic burden. But just having an idea of where your toxin levels are, it looks at BPA. I've done the microplastic test too. So just reducing microplastics in all ways. So, of course, using glass, not drinking out of plastic, no plastic, little cups, and then heating it up in coffee. That's, like, one of the worst, just dispersing microplastics everywhere. Same thing with tea bags. I mean, that's, like, a lesser known, but really important. Those plastic tea bags, people are putting it into hot water, drinking green tea, thinking it's amazing for them, and then they're just drinking, like, you know, millions of microplastics, clothing even. I'm really trying to move my clothing to be natural fibers, organic, and just like a 100% cotton because a lot of these workout outfits for women, you know, the polyester, spandex, they're actually have a ton of microplastics in them. And then when you sweat, they're actually able to, like, seep in, transdermaline, a lot of the chemicals. So just working out in some basic, like, 100% cotton outfits instead of those, like, super cute workout outfits, That's something, really leaning into optimal nutrition. So I tend to eat similar to you, you know, like a Mediterranean style diet. I do eat red meat. Always just say think quality is everything and focusing on single ingredient foods. You know? Yeah. Like, one ingredient, kale, avocado, healthy fats are amazing. We know the eggs, you know, increasing your choline is better for baby's brain development. So I have eggs. I eat fermented foods, which are great for gut health. Love things like, pomegranates because they're loaded with urolithin a. A lot of the supplements that we know to be good for longevity, I do try to get in the food forms, like, urolithin a and, like, natto. I mean, it tastes horrible, but, like, it's, you know, you get a lot, a high dosage. Love taking taking the pomegranates, things like bone broth, which are really great for sealing the gut and improving gut health pre baby. I mean, even organ meats, so I can organ meat supplement of some kind. I mean, again, tastes horrible, but, really good, like, nutritional powerhouse just, you know, in one one small dosage. So optimizing sleep, you know, women experience stress at much higher levels. So that doesn't mean we have more stress. But the way that we perceive it, our stress levels are higher. It's crazy because I look at my husband's Oura ring and I look at mine. He's the CEO. He wakes up super early, works so hard. He's building a business, but somehow he's in restored, like, all day on Oura ring. Not me at all. Like, I have way less stress than him, actually. But for some as a woman, we I think it's just we were built like that because we were built to have children. Right? So our senses are heightened all the time because we were meant to, like, hear the baby crying or, you know, watch out for something. We're just built differently. So Yeah. Our baseline stress is higher. And we know that, like, eighty percent of doctor visits are related to stress. So really trying to intentionally reduce stress, pre maybe or trying to be the most fertile. So for me, I've also Yeah. Like, wound in, as mentioned, you know, these cold therapy practices and stuff in the luteal phase and trying to focus on stress reduction, I think, is huge. Mhmm. One really cool thing that I've found hyperbaric does is that as soon as the chamber is pressurized, my stress levels on aura go from being stressed to being in restored immediately, and they stay there. So Yeah. That's a really cool thing. But I think women should intentionally build in stress reduction. So I have four to five times per day on my calendar starting in the morning that I'm doing breath work. I have a little device called a Moonbird, and it really helps you, like, slow down your breath and breathe super deep. And then I could see myself transition into parasympathetic. So I think that parasympathetic activation for women is so important. Because we also know women are experiencing, you know, eighty percent of the autoimmune conditions. We live on average four to six years longer than men, but we also experience a lot more and longer chronic disease. So, yeah, it's those are some of the things I'm doing for fertility optimization, and my husband's doing a lot of it too. I mean, leaning into exercise, we know that being sedentary is is, a negative for fertility. We know that having a high BMI is a negative for fertility. So, of course, those things focusing on high quality sleep will help with some of that stress reduction too and just balancing your hormones. So you say, like, a three month period before conception, you wanna be, like, a super clean lifestyle. Best ever. Yeah. Yeah. Because you can actually make a big impact in that three months. So that's kinda cool. You know? Yeah. I think people should not be discouraged if, you know, you really want to be in peak health. If you're you just start now in three months, you have this time to really, like, make a difference in your egg quality and sperm quality. Yeah. Many people don't think about it. Like, they don't think that your current state of health, how it influences the child, you know, even though you might be healthy later. But, you know, during the conception stage, you need to be in, like, pretty good health if you wanna make the child also, like, the the healthiest. There's, like, in, you know, after Chernobyl, there was, like, a lot of, women who, you know, were afraid of getting, pregnant, and they didn't because of the fear of radiation, you know, which will, you know, have some effects on Yeah. On the child. Oh, that's interesting. I wonder if there's, like is there a lot of research around Chernobyl and what happened there? Well, I I remember reading a few studies where there was a lot of abortions after Chernobyl because of because the because the women were afraid of some risk for the child. But, apparently, it's not, like, that big an effect that it would, like, significantly increase the risk of some some mutations or something. So yeah. Unless you were very close to it. Like, you know, if you were if you were in Sweden during the explosion, then you probably didn't have any significant risk. Yeah. So, yeah, the, you know, exposure and how far are you away from it has a much more important role. Yeah. And the same with, you know, the environmental pollutants. Like, the LA fire is probably, you know, will have a bigger effect now since it's been recent. So there's a lot more of these pollutants in the air than, you know, six months ago. Yeah. Well, I looked into a little bit. Like, I was just trying to understand what happened around 09:11. You know? So there was two buildings, and there are about a 130,000 people from what I found enrolled in, like, a government supported health program, because of it's not it's, of course, the initial issues and the initial exposure. But my concern and why we're leaving LA is that I think as they go to clean it all up over the course of the next two years, it's gonna keep being reintroduced into the Right. Into the air. You know? And they're really harmful things that are linked to things like birth defects and infertility and cancer. And so, I mean, for me and I know that this is coming from a massive place of, like, you know, privilege. I'm leaving. But if I weren't leaving LA, I would definitely do everything I could to detox as often as possible. Yeah. Gotcha. What what about, like, for men? Like, is there a way to enhance, like because, you know, the there's declining birth rates for many reasons. People choose to have less children, but there's also, yeah, like, declining fertility because of the modern lifestyle. Other, like, way like, what do you think is the biggest reasons why the your birth rates are declining, and are there some things that people can do to, like, support their fertility? Yeah. Of course. I mean, well, I think the biggest number to think about is, like, the fact that fertility on and on itself, not even just the birth rates, has declined about 30% in the last thirty years. So it's going down about 1% each year, which doesn't sound like a lot per year, but it's compounding. Right? So when we get to fifty years, we have 50%. So, yeah, it's certainly 50% for the men, 50% of the women, so it's both sexes need to be optimized. Right? And I think for sure I mean, it's so many things. Right? Like, sedentary behavior constantly. I mean, we know that, sixty percent of Americans have one chronic disease, forty percent of Americans have two chronic diseases. This is absolutely insane. Right? So trying to get in the healthiest state ever, lower BMI, exercise, improving hormones in general, I think, is helpful, and also reducing the amount of environmental toxins. So both of these things really apply to both sexes. Gut health optimization, really important for both sexes, and, also nutrient status. You know, optimization, I think, can be helpful for both sexes. And it's it's great because if you're married, like, you know, for me, I make all the meals. So, like, I look at my husband labs, and then I make all the meals, and then I prepare the supplements. So, like, he doesn't really have to do much different. You know? He's just, like, kind of following the protocol. But I think, yeah, definitely just just maintaining a super healthy lifestyle is gonna be so helpful. Sleep too for men, really all the same things, and then probably supplementation for men too. So I love you can do, like, a one stop shop, like a prenatal for men, which is, like, a very common thing now. I think it used to not be, but now it's quite common. So I find that to be to be really helpful as well. You mentioned your husband was on small testosterone, before. Yeah. So that reduces sperm count. Right? Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. I mean, if you're on testosterone and you wanna have children, I mean, I would be really careful. There are other options that you could consider, something maybe like anglomiphene for a short dose. But, yeah, testosterone, it essentially turns off the signaling mechanisms to the testes to produce these sperm. So and and some people on testosterone, not to be, like, fear mongering or anything, it's very bio individual. But, if you're on it for a super long time, you just wanna be conscious if you wanna have children in the future. So, yeah, I mean, right away, I asked him to cease that, and, thankfully, he did. How many kids do you want? We want a lot. So I would like to have, like, five or six kids. So my husband was one of six. He was all him and all the siblings were homeschooled. I was one of five, so we both had big families. And, yeah, we wanna have I didn't ask you that question. How many kids do you want? Well, yeah, I mean, we were thinking of two would be, like, definitely what we want, maybe three, four. So depends. Yeah. The interesting thing is that, women who are able to have children later in life, they live longer. So, like, if they can have it in forties, a child, then, that's a good sign of, of good health. So, yeah, maybe maybe we'll have more. So who knows? I mean, hey. You know, for me, it's like, why not? Why not have a bunch of, like, little amazing kids running around? It's gonna be so fun. Yeah. And, for men, especially, like, I think, I saw some study on Amish Amish people, that for men, the lowest mortality was something like fourteen children. Oh my god. And, for the for the woman, it was something you get, like, six or five Five, six was the lowest. Wow. So I mean, yeah. People have been having babies, you know, forever, and it's it's really sad that we're in this place that people are struggling so hard to get pregnant. Some of it has to do with age in general because the age of first baby is just getting, you know, pushed out. Obviously, it was, like, you know, late, like, teens at some point, like Yeah. 19, 20 years old, mid twenties. But, now we're having babies older, so that means we have to take even better care of ourself. You know? Yeah. There's a lot of some fear that if you if you're past, you know, 35 or something, then, you shouldn't have kids anymore because it's too late Yeah. For the woman, but which you know, con if you look at the studies, yeah, like, women who have children in their forties, they, you know, they are able to live longer. So Yeah. But I do think it's a big correlation that they're already healthier. Right? So Well, that's the that's the point. Yeah. Like, if you are able to do it, then you're healthy. Mhmm. You have a, you know, healthy body. One interesting thing, yeah, like, we touched already is, like, the pollutants and microplastics and those kind of things. Do you have any, like, specific protocol you follow and, like, what kind of tests you do to, like, remove them? Because, you know, they're everywhere and they've become quite, like, worrisome in the sense you find them that in higher amounts of microplastic in the arteries, increases risk of heart disease or heart attacks. So Yeah. They're, like, accumulating a brain and Yeah. Two two two x the speed. It's wild. So in terms of testing, I do the total toxic burden test. I've also done, there's another microplastic only test. Do you know the one that I'm talking about? I'll send you the link. Mhmm. I forgot the name of the company. But that'll just show you if you have microplastics. Right? I mean, everybody has some some form of microplastics. I think when I think about this, it's obviously, you know, I actually interviewed doctor David Fuhrman. Do you know who he is? Mhmm. From the Buck Institute. And he thinks that microplastics is, like, the biggest threat to humanity after, like, a world war. So really important topic here. Mhmm. So what do what do I do? First is, like, reducing it, microplastics. So what do I do for that? Definitely no tap water. Tap water is one of the biggest sources of microplastic exposure. So filtering, preferably with, like, a reverse osmosis, that's what's really gonna get the microplastics out. Then you have to remineralize it, though, because it strips out everything, including the minerals. So I put minerals back in. Salt is actually a huge source of microplastics because it's sitting in the bottom of the ocean collecting. So I have a like, my husband was laughing last night. He's like, you have four different types of microplastic free salt in there. Mhmm. So, microplastic free salt is a big one. Just simply never having plastic. It's it's hard, though, because even if you order from a grocery store, like, things are in plastic. So Right. Ideal life for me is gonna be always going to the farmer's market, never using a plastic bag Mhmm. But it's so hard. So Yeah. Reducing your exposure as much as humanly possible. I also have a microplastic filter on my dryer, so it actually collects the microplastics from clothing. So that that can be helpful. Let me think, of course, just like steel, anything that you're cooking with, never using plastic. I searched for this coffee. Yeah. I mean, I actually I found the best brand over here after, like, trial and error. 100% pure ceramic. It's called Xtrema. Mhmm. So I really like that one, and I like cast iron too because a lot of these brands, they just, put a ceramic coating on it. And then once that coating, you get through it, then you get, like, exposure to these harmful, you know, chemicals. Same thing with even cutting boards. So in the kitchen, doing, like, a wood or some sort of stone cutting board can be really helpful for the kitchen to reduce your micro microplastic exposure. We mentioned clothing, swapping out that. And then in terms of detoxification, I mean, I love a lot of fiber and, like, cruciferous vegetables. Sulforaphane is great for that. So I do sulforaphane supplementation, a lot of, like, broccoli, cauliflower. Not only is it good for just, like, keeping things regular and fiber requirements, but it's good for detoxing. Eating a lot of antioxidants is super important for getting rid of some of these, microplastics. Sauna is really, really great. So doing sauna sauna's amazing. Right? Like, the risk of Yeah. I believe it's a sixty six percent reduction in dementia with four sauna sessions or more per week. Yeah. You have a massive risk in all cause mortality and cardiovascular events. So doing that, super important. This this is, like, way, let's just work from, like, basic to, like, up to more extreme. Yeah. So reducing exposures in all ways, definitely do that immediately. Never drink these, like, soft plastic water bottles, you know, and then people, like, put them in the car and then they're in heat. It's a total disaster. So just stop doing that and always be a nerd. Like, have a little water bottle that you bring Unless you're in the Sahara Desert and looking for water. Yeah. Then maybe then. Then maybe. But, you know, it's, like, so funny. Like, most women carry around, like, a handbag. I just show up everywhere with a glass bottle of water. Like Right. Everyone's like, you just bring this everywhere, and I do. That's super helpful. And then so we talked about some detox modalities, the sauna, I mean, exercise, just moving your body, sweating. We were meant to sweat. I don't think that we do that nearly enough now because we're way too sedentary. But sweating is a mechanism to excrete these things. Obviously, regular bowel movements are a way to excrete, toxins. A few more advanced things that, you know, I'm doing to because we actually don't know how to get the microplastics out of the tissues once they've actually embedded. So our best bet right now is to get them before they've been embedded in the tissues. Yeah. When they're in the blood. So, things like, you know, eBoo can be helpful. Plasmapheresis can be really helpful. You could also I don't know the exact percentage of efficacy, but, you know, some people donate plasma and donate blood. Right? So you can do these things that are free. That's what we're supposed to do. Get paid for them. Yeah. So that is something because we, of course, know TPE is, like, very expensive right now. But those are a few things, I think, to get them out of the blood in addition to all of the other practices. Is there anything I missed? Is there anything else you're doing? So, I mean, yeah, like, there's best way to, yeah, like, is to get them out of the blood. So, like, blood donation, taking the blood out, filtering it, like, with, the TPN, those kind of things, I think, they're they're the most effective probably. Mhmm. There's also things like, this IV with a UV light or something like that you do the light to shut into your veins. So, like, there's some research that the UV light goes breaks down some of these, microplastics, but it doesn't, you know, take it out. Yeah. So the EBO would be probably, like, a better version because you take out Mhmm. It goes through a little filter. Filter, and then you also shoot the UV light in there, ozone ozonated. So and then get get back in. So that's a more efficacious approach, I would imagine. But, you know, there's no studies on that yet. But, theoretically, like, the TP is probably, like, the most effective or or blood donation. Mhmm. Blood donation is like a low lower barrier to entry. You you get paid or it's free. So Yeah. But, yeah, you're you're giving it to someone else I know. Who is, you know, in dire need of it, if they if they need a blood donation. But, you know, it's still, you know, it's better than nothing. Yeah. So I think I think that's where we're at. I think a lot of companies, tech companies are, like, pursuing this. Right? Because it's, like, a massive issue for human health. How do we get rid of these, get them out of tissues? And I can't even I can't really think of a good way even just first principles thinking. Like, how do you get them out of tissues without going inside the body? I don't know. Maybe, I don't know, HBOT or something because oxygen because environmental plastics, they're great with oxygen Yeah. And sunlight. So, maybe there's something there. But It's just like, how long is it gonna take for them to degrade? You know? Yeah. Yeah. The best thing best thing is to do, yeah, just to get them out of blood, regular day. And reduce your exposure, like, as much as be like, think about I'm thinking about it all the time, right, which might seem like a little neurotic. But, like, once you get yourself set up, it's not so much, like, stress. Like, once you have eliminated plastics, you have your little water bottle and all your things, then you don't have to think about it so much. Yeah. It's hard in the beginning when you're kinda used to Mhmm. The plastic. But if you, yeah, like, start using a stainless steel pan or whatever, you remove the plastic cutting board, then it's I mean, it's just there's literally no effort to just replace it. Yeah. Same. Well and, also, one other thing about the kitchen is those, you know, like, black utensils are apparently made from, like, old electronics. Okay. Wow. And so you're, like, heating them up. Yeah. I mean, awful. So I use, like, just stainless steel, utensils. You know? Some from time to time, a wood utensil, you have to be careful. You don't get, like, mold or something in the wood. But, yeah, just optimizing, you know, as you can. Like, don't be overwhelmed. But I've tried to make, like, my home environment as optimal as possible so I don't have to think about it. Yeah. What do you think about the total plasma exchange, from a longevity perspective, not just the detox? Do think it has any, like, longevity potential or benefits? Yeah. One other thing to mention too is air filtration because we actually breathe more than we do anything. Yeah. So, the air inside of homes is typically, you know, about, I think, eight to 10 times worse than the air outside. So that, I think, is another big, lever that you can pull is really filtering your air and getting those microplastics out of the air and any other contaminants, because that was the issue with the LA situation. And so when you breathe things in, it bypasses your detoxification systems, and you have all these, like, capillaries and blood vessels in your lungs. So breathing something in is actually, like, one of the worst ways Yeah. To be exposed to it because it gets a massive dose right into the bloodstream. One of the ways they get to the brain is through the olfactory bulb. Mhmm. So it's like the soft tissues where they just merge through it Yeah. Exactly. The brain. So like, I'll show you when we, when we go back upstairs, I have, like, a Jasper in every single room, which is, like, way too much, technically. But, like, you know, the air quality even throughout the fires, I have little testers all throughout the house of the air quality, and it remained good throughout the whole fire. So Right. So TPE for longevity. Yeah. I mean, I think that there's a massive benefit for longevity. So it was originally used, from what I understand, for people, with very serious autoimmune cases. So it would actually remove some of those antibodies. So let's say you have Hashimoto thyroiditis. Mhmm. You would have, these antibodies that are attacking your thyroid. So it can remove those from the plasma and lower the impact and the damage on your body. It also was used during, COVID apparently for people experiencing these cytokine storms to really reduce them. So I think, yes, for longevity. Probably, though, the benefit is primarily coming from the reduction in things like microplastics, heavy metals Mhmm. Molds and mycotoxins. That would be my first line of thought. What about you? Do you think any other longevity kind of I mean yeah. Like, with age, you'll have just more inflammatory molecules, old proteins of just young material in the in the blood. And, you know, there's, there's these studies with this blood exchange between, like, old mice young mice, etcetera. And, apparently, the old mice do get healthier from the blood of the young mice. So, if you just, you know, take out the old blood and filter it Mhmm. And you have a little bit younger blood, then, it might have some systemic effects, you know, this theoretically. So I'm just very interested in, yeah, like, what it's gonna turn out to be in the next few years if, you know, we will have some studies on it. But, you know, theoretically, yeah, just removing just even just, yeah, like, the toxins and the junk material, then Mhmm. You'll just have, like, just better health, if not longer life. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, in in general, yeah, like, becoming worse at fighting off all things. Right? So just, yeah, like, an infusion. When those studies, I can't remember. How did they track how long the benefit lasted with the old and the new mice? The old and the new I don't remember exactly, but, I think they were attached together Yeah. Yeah. Like, continuously. So, like, I think it lasted on because, you know, if you detach them, then the the effect is gonna wear off eventually. Mhmm. So Yeah. That is that is interesting. I have I have not gotten any infusions of any new blood. I've heard of that. Yeah. What about Hbot? Do you Yeah. I mean, so I definitely need to do exact biomarkers because I've been doing Hbot actually for a very, very long time, like, intermittently. Mhmm. I just, this year, really did, like, the big protocol. So my HBOT doctor, do you know doctor Scott? Yeah. Yeah. I'm sure. So I have a one base, and so he's helped me put together my protocols. And so I I have loved it from a cognition standpoint. I mean, my AMH, I wish I had an AMH before I ever started HBOT, but I unfortunately don't. I've definitely feel a lot of good benefits. My health is good, but, unfortunately, I don't have. I wish I had, like, biomarkers right before and then after. But from what he is showing, actually, HBOT is a great way to improve sperm quality. That's been proven in the literature. It's really great for brain health. We know that for sure. Any, concussions or any TBI is really helpful for healing and repairing brain. Also, things like ED or erectile dysfunction because of the improvements in blood vessels and vascularity and the ability to kind of, like, revascularize, which is incredible. The stress reduction, I saw that direct impact. So really being able to put into a parasympathetic state. Let me think about some they're doing, studies right now on fertility in h bot, which I'm excited to see what those yield. They're doing studies on, AMH, that anti mullerian hormone or the ovarian reserves. Because women these days are experiencing diminished early ovarian reserves, like, more so it seems than in the past, and I think a lot of it has to do with environmental toxins and just lifestyle. But, yeah, HBOT has been great for me so far. Also, I mean, telomeres, they say that they lengthen telomeres. My telomere age, I got a new test yesterday. It's, 23. So, I mean, things are going well, in that regard. But I yeah. And the next one that I do so the way that doctor Scott framed it for me was that I should do, body protocol. So that's 40 sessions, one hour per day, five times per week until you hit the 40 sessions at two point o ATA. Mhmm. Then you take a break and do maintenance. You can do, like, one to two sessions per week if you want, just setting maintenance. And then you do BRAIN protocol, which is 1.5 ATA, so dropping down the pressure, and then repeating those one time per or one hour per day, five times per week at 40 sessions. So I'm gonna try that and see Okay. See what happens. But, yeah, the the studies on telomeres are pretty good too. So Mhmm. I think it can definitely play a role in longevity. I mean, oxygenation of the tissue in the body and improving, you know, blood flow are all incredible benefits and really go to, like, the bottom line of longevity, I think. Yes. I also think it's very interesting. It's not gonna be, like, some radical life extension, but, again, like, better, I guess, better blood markers that then correlate to a lower risk of some chronic diseases. Mhmm. Yeah. Mhmm. Supplements are, like, very popular. Like, do you take any supplements, or even peptides? I do. I've tried a lot of different stuff. You know, I love them for all different indications. The way I think about supplements are I have, like, my nonnegotiable things like omega. So there's interesting research on having an omega index over eight. So I usually, try to keep my omega index about 10. This is a blood lab for anybody that's listening that will measure the amount of omegas in your body, so I do an omega three. I like the Metagenix brand. I do a vitamin d supplementation. I, like you, keep my vitamin d at about 70 to 80. I think that's an ideal range. There's a lot of research to linking, vitamin d and fertility, so that's important for women to know. And then I have, like, things like magnesium. That's, like, in my nonnegotiable bucket. Right? Mhmm. And then I have things that are in my protocol bucket, so that will be whatever I'm working on. So right now, because of the fires, it's detox. So I have additional, like, sulforaphane. I have additional vitamin c. I'm doing binders. I'm on, like, a cell core protocol. I also am doing a prescription called the that we talked about earlier to help get rid of some of those environmental toxins. And then I have my, what I call, like, longevity stack. So that is a little bit of NMN, which, you know, I do NMN or NAD testing as well. And it's it's wild. I mean, it's it's you need to do supplementation to keep your levels up at this, at least in the environment I'm in right right now. So I do a little bit of, NMN. I do spermidine, I think, is an interesting molecule. It kinda mimics autophagy. So I am trialing that. I try stuff all the time. You know, it doesn't always necessarily stay. Yeah. I think methylene blue is a kind of interesting compound. I kinda go back and forth with prescriptions, actually, for some cognitive enhancement. I've also done ethylene blue IV therapy and, like, stack that with red light. That's kind of powerful and, I mean, really good mental clarity. Let me think what else I really enjoy. I mean, I think your lysine a is great, but you can also get it from food sources. So really thinking about improving mitochondria specifically in the ovaries and the oocytes for anyone that's, like, looking to get pregnant, I think, would be really helpful. So I take, the the Medopure, urolithin a supplementation. And let me think what else I really am enjoying these days. From a peptide standpoint, I think that I've tried so many of them, and we also prescribe a lot of them. So, like, anyone dealing with, glycemic issues, I think mot c is something to, explore. I have tried CJC and apopmorelin, so that can help with body composition. And anyone looking to, like, lose a little bit of fat, add a little bit of muscle. Actually, I haven't even talked about this, but this is kinda wild, something that I did in end of one test. So I started trying, a GLP one at a very small dosage. I was doing, five units. Mhmm. I'd only did it for about a month, and I wasn't doing it for the weight loss benefits, but supposedly, it can be really good for, like, longevity, metabolic health. But what's crazy is what happened to my leptin when I got off of it. So my leptin is so high right now just from a month of that tiny of a dose. So a normal dosage of this GLP one would it depends on the provider, but, like, something like fifty units. Mhmm. So I was taking five, super low. Didn't even, like, have any really weight loss impact. But wild, how my leptin right now is almost 50. It's that of, like, an obese person. So it's crazy to me, the swing. I think that this is not talked about, and I think it should be. Because if I didn't have as much discipline as I have because I'm, like, hungry all the time now. If I didn't have as much discipline so if you think about it, imagine someone on a dosage. So I don't know where I land. I'm just having conversation about this, about the GLP ones because it does seem to have, of course, weight loss benefits, and then you get all these longevity benefits from losing weight. They also seem to have some independent benefits of longevity. But imagine trying to get off of it if I was on a high dose like a normal person would be. And then your leptin, so that's, like, increasing your hunger hormones, like, crazy, Just spikes massive. So Yeah. That's like a rebound effect then. Major. But I did not expect that with such a small dose for such a short period of time. Yeah. You would expect, yeah, like, some people to regain some weight once they stop taking, GLP ones and they'll you know, because the hunger comes back. Mhmm. But, yeah, like, the leptin is quite interesting. Or maybe that's that's the reason why they rebound then, the leptin increase. Seems so. Yeah. But I'm just curious, like, what would it be if I was on a higher a normal dose. Right? Because it almost makes me feel like it really is gonna keep people on it forever. Mhmm. Like Yeah. Well, that's very interesting. Yeah. Once they go But they do have, you know, very crazy results with the weight loss. Yeah. So it's kind of a, are you gonna stay obese, or are you gonna use it and lose the weight and get to normal weight? You know, even though you have to might take it for a longer period of time, you know, you could be able to, you know, stop it and then regain maybe 10% back, but it's still better than being a 100% of the initial weight. So Yeah. I mean, I think for sure Yeah. Like, people that really need it, I mean, totally, I I would do it. So, I mean, GLP one is a peptide, so there's that. I have tried that. But as just mentioned, it was for a very short period of time. I'm trying to figure out how to, like, get the leptin back down to, like, normal levels quickly, but we'll see how long it takes. I'm gonna do a little video on that too. Other peptides that I think are interesting, there's, like, kissopeptin and PT one forty four. And those are interesting for, like, sexual function for both men and women. Not really my thing. I don't really need that. But, you know, if you're having issues, that could be something to consider. Yeah. So those are BPC. Peptide. Which one? BPC. Oh, BPC. I love that. Yeah. Actually, I'm taking oral BPC right now Mhmm. Because it's great for gut health, and I'm, you know, optimizing the gut pre baby. So I'm doing a prescription compounded oral BPC, and then I've done, BPC, of course, injectables. Actually, I broke my finger on the door outside. It's, like, so heavy, and I healed it in, like, two weeks by injecting BPC right into the Alright. Fat pad of my hand, and it healed so fast. It was crazy. Right. Yeah. So That's interesting. I did that, and I did red light therapy on it, for fifteen minutes per day. And then I did PEMF on it, and it, like, was healed and back to normal within two weeks. So it's pretty exciting. But that one's a great one. Body, protection compound. Great for people that, have any injuries like healing, just wanna recover faster if you're really doing intense exercise. My husband takes CJC. That one is really, you know, great for him in the gym. So, yeah, I mean, I love peptides. I think it's exciting that we're getting access to these fun fun molecules, although then they kinda, like, take them away sometimes, and then now they gave them back. Right. There was a whole thing with the FDA here in America, but now they gave them back, which is absolutely amazing. Mhmm. That's crazy. Yeah. I don't like the research, but I'm not a huge fan of the research peptides, though, because I'm concerned of, like, what if they have contamination with something. So I would recommend people get them from their doctor because your doctor can, like, prescribe you. Yeah. And then they're, like, compounded in an FDA approved facility. And Yeah. That's the problem with a lot of peptides that you never know what you get Yeah. Unless it's a quality source. Which one have you tried, Abigail? Is there any favorites you have? I've used only oral PBC. Okay. Yeah. And, I mean, I I use, like, copper peptide, but very, like, not all always. Yeah. There then there's GHCKU. That's a good one. More like topically. You can do it in injectable form, but that, you know, could be good for, like, skin. Yeah. But, yeah, those are probably oh, I also like, thymus and alpha. Those are for, like, immune system boost. So depending on, you know, if you need, like if your sickness is going around, you wanna do, like, a immune system boost, that's something to consider. Mhmm. And, yeah, I think that's probably I mean, I dabbled, you know, in a lot of them. But we've also seen, like, clinically, you know, we've seen some really good results with some peptides that have been great. Like, for women, when as we age in sarcopenia, you know, thinking about something like a CJC or a Tessa Morellin or something to, like, help out on a little bit of muscle mass, mainly CJC, to add on some muscle mass. Like, I've seen that be pretty effective. Yeah. But in general, I think, you know, with my exercise programming, I'm thinking a lot about, like, adding bone density, improving bone health, and adding in muscle as a woman. Like, I just hit, like, my grip strength is a 100. I mean, I really don't know many women that have a 100 grip strength, but, like, getting that muscle mass and thinking about strength is is so important because as we get older, when you hit perimenopause and menopause, you know, where you're precipitously gonna lose bone density, and you're also gonna lose muscle mass. And we know that, like, if you you know, women, if you fall and break a hip, I forgot the percentage, but it's an incredibly high percentage that you will not make it home from the hospital. Yeah. Yeah. It's pretty risk risky for other people. And Yeah. You have some menopause, yeah, the bone density goes pretty low. I'm excited to see like, I feel like the biggest game changer for women's longevity would actually be to delay menopause because Yeah. When you hit menopause, like, your risk of everything increases, like, everything. You know, cardiovascular disease and dementia, all cause the mortality increase substantially. So it's amazing that it's 2025. I don't know if you know this, but the ovaries age at double the speed of every other organ. Yeah. And we basically have no idea why still, like, in the research. So I'm doing some things that are kind of interesting. So thinking like first principles thinking. So as a woman goes through her, like, menstrual cycle, there's an entire inflammatory cascade that's happening because you're building up this lining, then the lining is shedding, and and then it's doing it again and again and again every month. So I'm using trying to strategically use, like, HBOT and red light therapy to, reduce that amount of inflammation. Mhmm. Because, like, I did I actually did egg freezing because we want so many kids. If we only wanted one or two, I we would just start having kids, and it would be no problem. But I wanna have it just in case. But, usually, when a woman has this retrieval of the eggs, it takes, like, two and a half weeks for the ovaries to go back to normal. My doctor almost fell off of her chair when I came in just five days after my retrieval. She's like, Kayla, I have never seen anything like this. In all my days of doing this, your ovaries are back to normal. Like, what did you do? And I did h bot and, of course, like, general healthy lifestyle. But I did red light therapy, like, actually on the ovaries combined with h bot, and it really was able to make a massive impact on that inflammation. So I'm just wondering. I'm like, if we can reduce the inflammation in the ovaries throughout the cycle, can we prolong the longevity of the ovaries? I'm also doing, not taking it now because we're about to have babies, but I was doing rapamycin, which interesting you know, there is very controversial now. Right? Because now some people are saying it can increase your biological age, but there's an interesting paper. It's not been yet peer reviewed, but rapamycin hasn't been able to extend, ovarian aging by five years in in these new papers. So, you know, taking it for that reason only for a woman could be interesting. Yeah. Yeah. I was seeing that and it's, yeah, like, very interesting that women you know, one of the reasons why women might live longer than men a few years is because they you know, up until menopause, they have high estrogen that has cardio protective effects. So they get, like, you know, four, five decades of time where their cardiovascular burden is, somewhat lower compared to men Mhmm. Which, you know, starts accumulating already much younger because they don't have that high estrogen levels. So, yeah, like, if you can extend that window so we get menopause in your sixties, for example, then, you know, women would theoretically automatically add another five, ten years to their lifespan just by doing that. So yeah. And it's, you know, kinda unfair that you have, you know, normal sex hormones and then after menopause, it just drops off the cliff whereas men Mhmm. You know, you can have pretty high testosterone even when you're 80 years old. Mhmm. But it does, you know, kind of trickle down slowly compared to women. Yeah. And these hormones are beneficial for health. Right? I mean, it's also wild, like, the misinformation kind of around women's health. So my mom lives in Ohio. It's a very small town in, you know, the The US. And her doctor read the really old study. There was a study on the women's health initiative. Like, over twenty years ago, they used the wrong sort of, like, hormone relate replacement therapy, and they started it way too late. I think they started it, like, ten years after onset of menopause. This entire generation of these doctors were educated that hormone replacement therapy will cause cancer for women. And so my mom, even to as of today in 2025, her doctors are telling her that she shouldn't be on hormone replacement therapy. Thank goodness she has me. Right? And I literally have a clinic. I'm like, go to live and go get your hormone therapy because otherwise, like, she would think that it's it's really bad for her. But think I mean, just logically maintaining similar hormone levels and the benefits of estrogen and these other hormones, I mean, of course, it can be beneficial. So Yeah. Bioidentical, the right kind, under the right, like, advisement of a provider. You know? These things can be very, like, tricky to dial in the dose, so you wanna work with someone really good. But it's just sad that we're still having, like, misinformation from that long ago harming women, like, you know, in 2025. Yeah. Before we start wrapping up, what are, like, some of, like, a few tests that you think are essential for preventive health? Like, you know, obviously, blood panel, you can go as crazy with the blood panel as, anyone wishes, but, yeah, like, besides the regular blood work, are there, like, any tests that you think are really good for preventive health, and longevity? Well, I think it depends on what your family history is because based on that, what your predisposition like, if you have a family history of cancer, you might wanna look at something like a GRAIL test. Right? And a Pranuvo full body MRI to catch anything really early. Let's say you have, you know, cardiovascular disease that runs in your family and it's the number one cause of of it's number one killer anyway. You know, looking at, like, an advanced NMR panel, like so not just HDL, LDL triglycerides, but looking at, you know, l p little a and APO b. These more advanced cardiac panel markers are really important. I also let me think what else I really love. I mean, those are the big stroke and cardiovascular disease, top killers, cancer, diabetes. So, you know, h b a one c, looking at your metabolic markers are really important, and your, insulin markers, glucose. But you if you can only just do a h b a one c, that one's fine too. And then those advanced cardiac panels because that's gonna kinda look out for stroke and, cardiovascular issues and maybe like a have you heard of GRILL cancer prescreening? Yeah. Liquid biopsies are becoming more popular. I'm gonna do one every year just like for the rest of my life because cancers are getting younger and younger. It's insane. And then when you pair that with something like a full body MRI, you can catch anything really early. So I think it depends on what your personal, predispositions are. Also, genetics, you can take a look at your genetics and just see, like, what are you predisposed to. Because if you have, you know, like, multiple copies of Alzheimer's gene, for example, you might really wanna be putting brain health first. So that's why personalization is so important. Right? But in general, I think everybody should be testing twice a year at minimum, the most advanced panel that you can afford. Right? Looking at essentially every organ system. How is your liver performing? Your kidneys, your heart health, your brain health, just breaking those down and being as proactive as humanly possible. Because it's crazy in medicine because it's like one day, you don't have diabetes, and the next day you do, but that's not really how it works. It's Yeah. That was a buildup, and you could have seen that, like, five years ago on your labs. And then you could have aggressively worked to reverse it. Right? And then you wouldn't have gotten the type two diabetes in the first place. Yeah. I should have, like, a family member who did get diagnosed with diabetes recently last year, and, yeah, he never took a blood test for the last ten years or never went to the doctor. So you don't know when did he actually get it or, like because, yeah, it's a slow process of over over years. But I had a family member that just, you know, got I mean, actually went to my clinic, and our provider said, hey. Like, you you have prediabetes. Right? And but that's amazing because now guess what he can do? He can aggressively work to reverse that and then he just have to get diabetes. But in most medical, establishments, western medicine, they just will say, oh, you're fine. And then all of a sudden you get diabetes. Like, the prediabetes is, like, not even mentioned. You know? Yeah. You're fine until you're not. Yeah. Exactly. So. Well, yeah, it's it's been a great conversation. Before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and your work? Yeah. My website is Kayla Barnes, k a y l a b a r n e s, dot com. I'm also posting on Instagram under Kayla Barnes, and I recently started posting, like, long form female specific, longevity content on YouTube. Mhmm. So any of those places. That's good. We'll put the links in the show notes. And my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you'd up sooner? I would definitely say stress reduction. You know, I really push myself super hard, and I, allowed my stress to run at much higher levels than I probably should have for many years. You know, I wanted to do all the things. I wanted to be perfect in all the areas. I wanted to be perfect at working out, running companies, building businesses, showing up for everybody, and I wish I would have thought about stress reduction, intentionally earlier. Mhmm. Yeah. It's important. Well yeah. Well, thanks for having me and record the podcast here, and, yeah, thanks for having me on your podcast as well. So if you can check it out. Well, of course. Thank you for thank you for having me, and thank you for being online. Yeah. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Sim. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.