Many scientists call ergothioneine a longevity vitamin. It's been seen to increase lifespan in mice by up to 29% which is not a small effect. There's already multiple papers talking about ergothioneine's anti aging potential yet hardly anyone in the longevity space talks about it. Chances are you've never heard about it. In this video, I'm gonna talk about why ergothioneine could be a longevity vitamin and why you might not wanna take it as a supplement. So why does ergothioneine have benefits for longevity? Ergotioneine is a powerful antioxidant that fights oxidative stress, inflammation and cell senescence while also protecting the mitochondria. It works synergistically with other antioxidants like glutathione and superoxide dismutase to protect DNA and lower inflammation. Because of that, it has potential for improving metabolic disorders, cardiovascular disease, liver disease, neurodegenerative diseases and other inflammatory diseases. Another way ergathionine has longevity benefits is by increasing n ad levels and enhancing mitochondrial function. We obviously don't have studies looking at if ergothioneine would extend lifespan in humans, but there's some potential evidence for ergothioneine improving brain health. Ergothioneine is seen to accumulate in vulnerable organs that have the most mitochondria, such as the brain and the eyes. It can easily cross the blood brain barrier thanks to the ergothonin transporters, and it has antioxidant effects on the brain. That's why you have several human studies showing that ergothonin might improve cognition and memory. A 2024 randomized controlled trial on older adults saw that supplementing ten milligrams or twenty five milligrams a day of ergothione improved multiple cognitive domains in four to six weeks including reaction times, executive functioning, complex attention, and verbal memory. Twenty five milligrams a day also improved sleep and prospective memory. Another 2024 pilot study on '19 older adults with mild cognitive impairment saw that twenty five milligrams of ergothioneine thrice a week for a year improved verbal memory and learning. They also saw a biomarker of neurodegeneration called neurofilament light chain stabilizing indicating that ergothioneine may protect brain cells from accumulating damage. Low plasma ergothioneine levels in humans haven't seem to predict neurodegeneration and cognitive decline so having higher ergothione levels might have neuroprotective effects against dementia. By regulating inflammation and oxidative stress, ergothione also improves sleep as shown by the 2024 study on older adults. In another 2022 randomized controlled trial, twenty milligrams of ergothione improved subjective sleep quality while increasing deep n rem sleep and reducing sleep wakefulness as well as waking up after sleep onset. They also saw increased serum antioxidant markers. So where do we get ergothioneine because our body can't make it itself? Ergotioneine is a sulfur containing amino acid derived from histidine. However, mammals can synthesize ergothioneine and thus you can only get it from food. However, humans do have a dedicated ergothione transporter called ergothione transporter or ETT. The more complex scientific name is SLC two two a four. It's found in the small intestine, brain, liver, kidney, placenta and immune cells. So our body have a mechanism for absorbing ergothione from the food and the reason we have it is because we ate it in the past. What food are we talking about? Mushrooms. The main food source of ergothioneine are mushrooms because mushrooms can synthesize ergothioneine unlike animals or higher plants. Low levels of ergothioneine are associated with higher cardiovascular disease mortality, dementia, and all cause mortality. Countries with the highest intake of ergothioneine such as Italy and France have much lower rates of mortality than those with low ergothione intake such as The US. Americans consume less than one point one milligram per day of ergothioneine whereas Italians get four point six milligrams per day. So I would say that it's a good idea to get at least four milligrams of ergothione per day from your diet. Now ergothione can be obtained from what you would consider healthy foods, mushrooms, vegetables, garlic, onions, tempeh as well as some seafood. So it is an association when it comes to health benefits. But in mechanistic studies as well as the animal models ergothione does have longevity benefits so it's not a farfetched to suggest that ergothione would have those similar benefits in humans. When speaking of the randomized controlled trials then the efficacious dose is seen to be around twenty five milligrams a day. You could take a supplement for it, but I think that it's unnecessary. That's because mushrooms have a whopping six hundred and thirty to thirteen hundred milligrams of ergothioneine per kilogram. In a regular dish that contains perhaps a 100 grams of mushrooms, you'd get around sixty to a hundred milligrams of ergothioneine. That's more than enough for the brain benefits, and it's three times more than it was suggested in the study. Tempeh also contains two hundred one milligrams per kilogram of ergothioneine. So So if you consume a hundred or two hundred grams of tempeh, you'd get around twenty to forty milligrams of ergothione, which is again more than enough. Chicken liver has forty seven milligrams of ergothione, but realistically, you're eating around ten to thirty grams of liver in one sitting, which would give you around zero point five to one point five milligrams of ergothioneine. That's lower than what seems to be optimal for daily intake of at least four milligrams and up to twenty five milligrams. Processed foods don't have any or very minimal amount of ergothioneine, so eat more whole foods and perhaps add some more mushrooms to your diet such as chanterelle, portobello, champignon or others because they're very high in ergothioneine. Overall, there's not that much clinical studies on ergothioneine but there are a few human studies suggesting that ergothioneine improves cognition and memory. We do know that it has potent antioxidant and mitochondrial supporting effects and it seems to extend lifespan in animals. But I don't think that you need to supplement ergothioneine, to get twenty five milligrams of ergothioneine per day you can just add some more mushrooms or some of the other foods that I mentioned to your diet. Overall I would rank ergothione in kind of a interesting supplement with a lot of potential but we do need more studies about it. Right now I would stick to primarily getting it from food. If you want to know how I rank a 100 other popular supplements then check out my video about it next.