We all get a different deck of cards. You know, the law of large numbers says that we're not perfectly optimized, and that in some people, an unknown dose of lithium could potentially lower your risk of Alzheimer's and aging, and possibly a higher dose of lithium could allow you to be more emotionally stable. Doctor. Berner, welcome to the show. Thank you. Yeah. I'm, excited to have you on the show because, you have a lot of experience with, one particular compound that has become quite popular over the last few years and months, and that's lithium. So, yeah, I'm really excited to dig into the research on lithium and your experience and your practice with it. So I think people have a very, interesting show ahead of them. So, maybe we can start with, how did you, let's say because you've been using lithium for a lot longer than it has become popular over the last few years. So how did you, I guess, discover lithium? Well, I mean, lithium has been used as a mainstay in psychiatry for, oh, you know, decades and decades. And there's a fragment of the population that clearly should be on lithium in terms of a normative gain of function in the glycogen synthase kinase three beta pathway. And these are typically people with bipolar disorder. And you'll get arguments that are unanchored from solid epidemiology about what group of people should be on lithium and what dose. But we know about one percent of the population has bipolar one, which is, you know, severe hospitalization, disability, suicide attempts. Three percent of the population has mild form where they occasionally miss work for weeks or months and make major financial or sexual indiscretion. And then there may be a much broader population, maybe as high as ten percent of the population who have very subtle forms of mood and energy instability that would clinically benefit from lithium, just in terms of their emotional stability. Well, this is a, a a drug that has a very broad population indication in terms of mood disorder. And then when we move into the even broader distribution, you know, which would be even at lower dosages, what percentage of the population would benefit in terms of aging and Alzheimer's prophylaxis. That hasn't been studied. We have very good, if you will, natural experiments in terms of random variations in the water supply, which, you know, almost without exception, show increased longevity, decreased rates of dementia, suicide attempts, with even small dosages of lithium. So when you talk about lithium, it's not really a drug. I mean, the drug is irrelevant. You know, what is, you know, much more important for you and for your patients out there I mean, your patients, your your your podcast listeners is just this concept of random assortment of 3,000,000,000 base pairs. And we all get a different deck of cards that is randomly distributed. And, you know, the law of large numbers says that we're not perfectly optimized And that in some people, an unknown dose of lithium could potentially lower your risk of Alzheimer's and aging. Possibly a higher dose of lithium could allow you to be more emotionally stable in a very broadly defined, in a very broadly defined way. And we don't really have yet a technology to assay that deck of cards, you know, the 3,000,000,000 base pairs that you get from the parents, right, in terms of giving each individual person, you know, what is the right dose of lithium for me? And this is critical issue in community health. And in your own personal, you know, decision about, you know, what do I put into my body that is gonna help me optimize my lifespan, health span over a lifetime. Yeah. Yeah. You, were referring to the idea that lithium has been used for bipolar disorder for a long time and quite not recently, but it has also been seen to be potentially useful for Alzheimer's. So there's actually one study this year that claimed that lithium deficiency was a driver of Alzheimer's disease, which, yeah, makes it quite interesting for, just general longevity and preventing dementia and neurodegeneration overall beyond just bipolar disorder and similar conditions. So what what do you think is, the reason for that? So, you know, first of all, why does, lithium help with, let's say, mood disorders and bipolar disorder, and what is in so what are those mechanisms that could also have benefits on, Alzheimer's and neurodegeneration? Right. So, you know, biology is an engineering problem, you know. And one of the reasons I'm excited to talk to you is as someone who's interested in anthropology rather than psychology, you know, is the concept that human behavior is determined by evolutionary constraints, not so much by, you know, verbal concepts and, you know, self image and self esteem sort of things. But, you know, we have this three pound brain that has unbelievably, difficult energy constraints, you know, on all sorts of multiple time scale. And so when you're designing when evolution designs the system, it has to optimize inefficiently. Right? And so you talked about I think you and you've talked about this issue between the persistent predator, you know, that's skinny and sweats easily, you know, in in Equatorial Africa, you know, and a different population that stores fat well in areas with lots of seasonality. And this is fundamental to biology and fundamental to psychiatry, you know, that we live in this world of trade offs. We swim in a genetic river, and we don't even realize the river we're swimming in sometimes until a wave blows us up and we can see landmarks. So I'm I'm getting to my point, which is where there's trade offs between growth and specialization. And in biology, we use the distinction between the mTOR c one pathway, which monitors the internal energetic status of the cell. You You know, how much protein is available, how much ATP is available. That's mTORC one, and that determines cell growth. And then we have a different pathway to mTORC two, which is monitoring the signals from the external environment and determines how much a cell differentiates. And these are fundamental trade offs, you know. And Otto Warburg won the Nobel Prize for this in nineteen nineteen twenty three, you know, saying that we can we can use glucose for growth, you know, the mTOR c one pathway. Right? Or you can use glu glucose for action, you know, to make ATP to run a cell at high speed. And these are fundamental trade offs. Right? And so when you give a patient lithium or when you're taking lithium, you know, maybe for age related prophylaxis, the current scientific model would argue that you're mildly down regulating mTORC two, which is the activity pathway. You know, you're telling your nerve cells to fire slightly less hard. You're tailing your astroglia to produce food and and cholesterol to the nerve cells slightly less aggressively. You know, you may be telling the microglia that are pruning your cells you know, maybe you need to not prune eight hours a night, but prune six hours a night. And, you know, maybe the metaphorical concept is is that when a cell is overdriven, it tends to decrease its natural rates of autophagy and decrease natural rates of mitophagy. You know, it it it it lowers its maintenance cycle. And so it tends to die in a more senescent way. Right? It may prune its mitochondrial population less aggressively. You know, in other words, you get more less mitophagy. I mean, there's all these sort of postulated downstream mechanisms of unknown weight. But I think for people who are diving into biology and just getting overwhelmed with all these different pathways, supplements, and arguments about this and that, that chemical, you have to go back to the basics, which is there's a fundamental difference between a chihuahua, you know, that lives thirteen years and is really dumb, right, and a Rottweiler that lives eight years and dies young. But, you know, when they bite you, they've thought about it. Right? It's not the yippee kind of small brain dog that gets you. And these trade offs are hue are true in here. I mean, they they're everywhere. You know, we can't escape our biology. Yeah. Yeah. So the lithium then so you said it does suppresses mTORC two, which, then has a downstream effect in increasing autophagy, if I'm not mistaken, that supports, this, cell recycling. Yeah. I'm not sure I have it correct. I mean, the the the biological pathways associated with, suppressing GSK a three b are so many, you know, that it's easy to make correlations with anything. Right? And and especially if you're doing this in a dish. Right? Because cells differentiate in different ways. You know? So, you know, for instance, in the key the kidney, you know, uses glutamine as its primary fuel. The the intestinal mucosa may use butyrate. You know, the the the nerve cell synapses tend to use lactate and glucose. Yeah. The muscles use free fatty acids. So when we talk about using a metabolic drug like lithium, it's gonna have different effects in different cells in the body. Now what seems to be interesting in terms of decades of use of lithium, you know, decades of millions of people, that it it appears to target astroglia more than other cells in the body. And why do we know that? I mean, we know that because at low dosages, you don't really see a lot of changes in gross chemo gross chemistries or in other organ systems other than just in the variance in cognition and mood. Right. And it's probably an asterisk lea target. That's that's what I would suspect. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices, which are the bond charge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes. They do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin antiaging, hormone optimization, pain management, and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes, especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the Bond Charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most regular Therapeuticers don't have the right wavelengths of light, which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Boncharge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research, and they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code SIIM, s I I m, for a 15% discount. I mentioned the earlier study, this 2025 study that claimed that lithium deficiency was a driver of, neurodegeneration. That wasn't, like, animals. What's the human evidence for lithium in dementia or Alzheimer's? Oh, okay. Yeah? Yeah. What's our human data? Yeah. I think where I really got excited about this is it was a while ago, maybe eight years ago. I think Martin Scharf from Karolinska showed us some of his data at conference where he looked at telomeres in patients on lithium and their unaffected relative. Right? So and he showed that when he took patients with bipolar disorder and he put them on lithium, within six months, they had longer telomeres. And their telomeres were actually, I think, longer than their unaffected relative. And I think that's consistent with what we see in the the medical concept of bipolar disorder. You know? It it's it's not a disease of the brain. It's a disease of every cell in the body. And and when I saw that data, I I went to Matt Keverlin's office, and I said, hey, Matt. You know, we we actually have a biomarker, you know, showing that lithium can make you younger. You know, is there any is there any venue for us to you know, not so much start a business, but, you know, start an organization so we can leverage this data a little bit more aggressively. That's that's a major breakthrough. And, you know, neither here and I were in a position to do this sorts of this stuff. We don't have a, entrepreneurial brilliance, you know, to set up a company like this. So there's data with telomeres. There's data with less atrophy on MRI. I mean, there's a famous study looking at atrophy and mood disorder. You know, the idea was that, you know, if you're depressed, are you gonna have more atrophy with age? And the radiologist looked through these MRIs blindly, and they saw these nice big plump MRIs. And, oh my gosh, you know, the people that had the young MRIs were the patients on lithium. Right? And there's data from The U The UK Biobank looking that people on lithium have remarkably decreased rates of instant mortality relative to patients with mood disorders on other drugs. Mhmm. There's epidemiological data, you know, looking at natural variations in the water supply. I think we published a case report showing reversal of, some of the serum dementia markers within, you know, three months. Brazilians have a double blind study looking at Alzheimer's with lithium. Alright. There's there's a lot of human data. It's not hard to find. Yeah. The difference with the recent nature study that was looking at lithium is it was Harvard and it was in nature. Right? So it, you know, it really wasn't that unusual to see this result. Everybody knew they were gonna find it. Right? Yeah. What was different is they had enough money to do, you know, RNA analysis and and try to do some of the basic, you know, RNA analysis and look at some of the pathways and then drive the science forward in a more incremental and very technical way. But there was nothing, nothing surprising about that paper. It it it Yeah. Just is, you know, what happens in science. You know? Stuff happens in the fringes, and then the major journals just replicate what everybody already knows. Yeah. I got more attention. Just, gotcha. So the water supply thing is quite interesting that, areas with more lithium in the drinking water have lower rates of suicide, lower homicide, and just greater longevity overall. And you can see that in different parts of the world, like Texas, Japan, Lithuania, a few other places. So it's, you know, increases the likelihood that it is the lithium specifically in those areas that is responsible for some of those benefits. So lithium mesial are naturally occurring mineral, but, with many minerals, there can be or there is the risk that, you know, in very high amounts, it can be harmful. So what what is the sweet spot for lithium that No. I your listeners might find this interesting. I just found it hilarious. Like, a couple years ago, there was an article in a public health journal saying that we need to put lithium in the water supply. Mhmm. And, and if you read the the article, they said, we'll try to get this done with the democratic process, but if the public resists us, we'll do it anyway. So, you know, just for the paranoid people out there, you know, you better be careful because you may be ingesting more lithium whether you like it or not, you know, if if if we get too much excitement about lithium. Yeah. You know? But, I mean, maybe then people will be happier. They have better mood and less That's what we're both against public health establishment. If they're interstate non lithium. Yeah. But, yeah, you know, obviously, excess lithium could be harmful, and it it appears that, most people might be not deficient in lithium, but, you know, they could benefit from some small amounts of lithium, maybe from the drinking water or from some supplements. So, yeah, what do you think about the dose? Because I've seen that, you know, this recreational uses of lithium, they use something like one milligram of lithium per day, and, you know, the bipolar disorder doses are significantly higher, like hundreds of milligrams. So, yeah, what do you think is, what what do you think about the dose? You know, when I've been giving talks on lithium on this podcast, everybody keeps, you know, asking me, hey. You're the expert. What's the appropriate dose? And and the answer is we don't know. We don't have an aggregate dose. Right? Because the team is clearly going to make some people worse. And we know this. Right? This is absolutely certain. Right? Promised Low looked at different species of Drosophila and looked at caloric restriction in across species. And he showed that caloric restriction decreased lifespan in about 10 to 15% of Drosophila. But it massively increased lifespan in the other 85. So the net benefit is like, oh, caloric restriction is good for everybody. That's scientifically false. Okay. It's false. You know, that everybody should should pursue caloric restriction as a a longevity agent. And it's scientifically false that most people should would benefit from leaking. That's just an unsupported state. It may be in the aggregate that there is a substantial portion of the population that would benefit from living, and we should proceed this with all due an aggressive speed. Right? But we don't have the knowledge to tell an individual patient, you know, what dose of is right for you. Now I am gonna address this topic, and I'll try if you give me a few minutes about what the alternative is, which is the n equal one trial, you know, that I think a lot of the biohackers are are very appropriately trying to do, which is to look at their own unique biochemistry and design their own program that's relevant to them rather than using aggregate data. Right? And, you know, what would that mean? I think that would mean that you if you were interested in a drug like lithium, the very first thing you would do is just say, hey. What are my biomarkers? You know, what am I expecting to make better, or what am I expecting to make worse? And do I do I have a cost function that would let me decide whether this was a good drug for me? Right? So, you know, if you if you were worried, you say, you know what? I'm kind of a little bit on the bipolar side of things. I may not have a formal diagnosis, but my sex drive tends to be pretty high and variable like you see in bipolar patients as distinct from depressed patients. You know, no sex drive defines the depressive syndrome. High sex drive, by definition, defines the bipolar side effects. Right? The best way to make a male bipolar is to give super physiological testosterone. You can produce a bipolar syndrome in about twenty percent of men. You you can drive them on the Gaussian by differentiating a cell too much with high levels of torsy two, you know, which is a sex steroid. So for someone out there who's saying, hey. I wonder if lithium might be right for me. You know, do you look for these soft markers of bipolar disorder, you know, which is your sex drive tends to be high and variable. Your activity level tends to be high and variable. Right? You may have a higher IQ than normal. You may be in a family that has a dense history of mood disorder of any type, whether it be bipolar or depression. Right? There are all these soft markers of bipolarity that might make an individual person be more or less inclined to consider that lithium is a reasonable agent for them out of just the the immensity of all these agents that are supposed to make you live longer. I mean, there's so many now. I mean, you you can't even possibly handle all the combinatorial, trials. Right? So I think that's the very even before you think about with the dose, you just kind of try to think to, you know, to yourself. What objective scientific data do I have as as distinct from checklists, which are useless? I mean, phenotypic checklists. They're they're low density information that would suggest I might be somebody that has an overdriven torsy two brain. Mhmm. You know, that that is running at very high rates at the limits of the available energy supply. You know, so I often joke with my patients. I say, hey. You do you look like a normal person, but if I was if I was a, a Persian Indian, you know, opening up your skull, you know, the smoke would come out. Right? I mean, they'd be running really hot. And then, you know, what those you would use, you know, you don't you you there is no expert because this is a population distribution. And you can't look up some guideline from the Massachusetts General Institute of, you know, pharmacology or American Psychiatric Association of Pharmacology or, you know, some Institute of Lifespan Extension because I don't think the data has been generated. You know, in terms of the individual dose that's right for you, we just don't have that data. And you'll have to create a machine on your own to tell you what's the risk of benefit risk of benefit. Mhmm. Yeah. So you're saying that people with more bipolar tendencies and, mania and, like, more like hyperactive brain, they would benefit more from lithium than people more on the the prescribed And the risk is lower. Right? So if you tend to have very mild mood instability or emotional instability or cognitive instability, you know, energetic instability, whatever you call it, and you get a good response to lithium, you're gonna get the responses that we see in the clear bipolar patient population. Is that lifespan increases for patients who are treated for bipolar disorder not because of decreased suicide attack, which is there, but things like decreased auto accident. You know, you look twice, you know, pulling out of the driveway. Right? Decreased use of recreational substances. You know? Mhmm. You may be drinking, you know, five drinks a week rather than 15. Right? Mhmm. Things like, probably better control of your nutritional status. I mean, there's very clear very clearly a group of bipolar patients. They're on their diet. They're on their exercise routine for three months. They lose ten, fifteen pounds. They're super fit, and then they get a bipolar depression and everything falls apart, and they start getting caloric craving, and they move less, and then they gain the weight back. And they just don't understand it because they're a high IQ person. And, you know, why is it I can't keep my motivation stable? Right? Is that a marker of soft bipolarity? Right? And if it is and and drug like lithium and I don't care about lithium. Lithium is just a tool. Right? But it allows you to be more consistent over months and years in terms of your health maintenance schedule. You know, that's probably a good thing. You know, it allows you to use your other tools in terms of health maintenance, you know, caloric restriction, exercise, you know, sleep regulation, and whatever thing you think is useful at a time. You're gonna use that better, and so that's gonna increase your life. So just to summarize, I think the data with treating bipolar patients is that when your brain works better, the longevity implications may be downstream from health maintenance in general rather than just preventing suicide attempt. Yeah. Gotcha. Yeah. Because bipolar disorder patients have slightly unhealthier lifestyle habits or that or at least they have bigger swings in the consistency with those habits. There's there's research that the lithium could also help with the tau protein in the brain with, in in Alzheimer's and neurodegeneration. So do you think, or how big of a role does that have in longevity and what do you think about lithium as a potential treatment for neurodegeneration? You know, there's been many, many, many people studying this. Right? And from my perspective as a practicing psychiatrist over the last thirty years with more than 50,000 patients, you know, I worry that these studies really haven't done dose finding very well. Right? I mean, when you treat patients with mood with bipolar disorder, you end up creating these very personal cocktails. You know, some people are on twelve hundred lithium. Some people are on a 150. You know, when I'm treating people with very early Alzheimer's defined by the ATN markers, tau and amyloid, NFL, and blood, you're not using those dosages. The patients don't tolerate those dosages. And the doses that people get benefit and risk from are highly variable. Right? And so I I worry when you do these academic studies where the dose finding is in a very restricted range. Mhmm. You know, that we're we're miss we're we're not doing these correctly. You know, we need a we need a biomarker that is cheap, accessible. Everybody agrees it's useful, and there's a consensus about its utility. And I don't know if the field is quite there yet. You know? So in terms of serum biomarkers, there's still some arguments about the different tau species and which ones are better for Alzheimer's and which ones are better for different forms of dementia. And, you know, it's it's moving so quickly that it's hard for even someone like me who's kind of in this area to keep track of it, you know, let alone normal people just living their lives, you know, wanting to be current with the state of longevity research. Mhmm. Gotcha. There's also some evidence that it can be harmful for kidneys, lithium in large doses. So is that also something that is individual or, is there some threshold that you think exists? That may be completely incorrect Mhmm. In the sense that it's been known for quite a long time. Maybe. I you know, I'm not arguing for sure. Right? But it's been known for a long time that bipolar disorder is associated with accelerated rates of premature kidney failure and an unrelated kidney failure. And so some of the studies when they stratify bipolar patients maintained on monotherapy on agents other than lithium find similar or higher rates with other agents. And so you may be seeing confounding by indication, you know, this classic problem of wet roads cause rain rather than actual randomized studies. You know? Now higher doses, lithium is going to affect the kidneys preferentially to some degree because some of the kidney cells use, glutamine as their preferred fuel, and lithium affects the fuel, the glutamine homeostasis within the cell. And and people will have some metabolic toxicity from lithium at at at an unknown dose. Right? Highly dependent on the patient. Right? And so, you know, they'll be urinating more, and they'll they'll have a a defect in free water retention in the kidney. And that's usually reversible. Right? I I think there are edge cases of lithium toxicity that have been reported, but in general, I I'm not sure the science is very strong that lithium is causal in most cases of renal failure that you find in bipolar patients. Mhmm. This may have happened to any Gotcha. Yeah. Yeah. Obviously, I I didn't I've been I took Calyceum for a little while just for as an experiment, just to see, how I but if I notice anything, I was took a very small dose. I took only the one milligram, dose, and I didn't notice any like, I measured my kidney markers as well and didn't see any difference, which, you know, to be expected on a small dose. And in regards to the mood, then I'd you know, for what it's worth, I did experience maybe, like, a five to 10% increase in my mood. But, that's very subjective and, you know, not very scientific, way to go about it. But, yeah, that's just my own short experiment that I did. I I I actually did it, like, twice, once a few months ago, and the the first time I did it, like, several years ago. But have you, like, yourself tried to use lithium or microdose lithium? Oh, for me? Yeah. Just as an experiment. No. Because I don't have the time for it. You know what? You know? I don't have a death neurosis. I'm I mean, I'm not, like, horrifically fearful of dying. Yeah. I'm not seeing any, you know, reasons as yet to to the cost benefit of this experiment. You know, if it if it turns out that I'm seeing early signs of brain instability, that's a different story. But, you know, there's a lot of things that people need to attend to in their life other than just living as long as they can. I mean, that's the that's the trade off between short lived animals and long lived animals. And, again, it's a it's a normative human variation. Normative, right, to have more or less concern about longevity. And and, again, this is just a really important point. You know? The longevity community is not normal. Yeah. They're not. I mean, we know it. By definition, they have a different chemistry than the non longevity community. And great. Wonderful. Right? But, you know, to to expect that everybody is the same is is one of these giant errors in when you do scientific studies. You see this all the time in terms of, you know, drugs that have an effect size in a university setting and drugs that are used in the community. I mean, patients that that tolerate university scientific protocols are weird, right, because they're so rude. I mean, they make the patient show up every week, and you do all these laboratory draws, and, you know, they're very tight and demanding. And, you know, normal people in my clinic are gonna tolerate those sort of protocols. You know? They want their health care like their their food at a fast food restaurant, cheap, fast, and good. Right. Right? And so referral bias is really a problem when you try to extrapolate from these university studies. Yeah. Okay. Then then that's almost like a form of, you know, not selection bias, but kind of survivorship bias that the people who actually end up going through those studies are, you know, already with certain characteristics A 100%. May not be representative of the general population. Right. And that and I think that's, you know, the message to the longevity community. Be yourself. Right? You don't the very fact that your interest in longevity makes you different than the regular population. You don't need to be the regular population. You have your own, you know, unique humanity. You know, you're gonna have to invent your own protocols that are right for you rather than, you know, this sort of average human of a conglomerate of everybody. You know, going back to the issue of checking your mood, you know, the temporal lobe, you know, which stores our episodic memories, you know, it's not very well optimized to remember the moods from day to day. Right? I mean, we go to bed and we forget our failures. Maybe to some degree, we forget our successes, you know, and we're a different person every night. Every in the morning after our microglia, you know, digest our emotional experience from the day. And so it's pretty tough to know sometimes if you're getting a modest effect from a drug like lithium because you're just not really optimized to remember your moods in granular detail from day to day. You know? It may be a more practical biomarker to look at things like the the sleep quality, you know, with high level lactography. And, again, I don't know if there's a gold standard for that yet. I mean, you can do Fourier transforms on on sleep, I suppose, and and do some dimensionality reduction. But that's only one way of looking at this very complicated waveform. And, maybe the longitudinal community is the people that need to do this. Right? So there's data from UCLA, I think, that was replicated once looking at predicting mood disorder course in 15 year olds. And you could sleep so you could see from the sleep quality in 15 year olds who is gonna develop bipolar disorder ten years later. Wow. You know? So you may not need to monitor your mood. You know, if you're really disciplined and thoughtful about the way you look at your sleep quality with current wearables. That might be the kind of information that would make you a little bit more consonant to go in one direction or another. Mhmm. Yeah. Gotcha. But would the prophylactic lithium use then be kind of a useful in that scenario if you are noticing those things or what what should should someone then get, like, some more professional assessment? And, I guess, yeah, is it safe then to take lithium, you know, just recreationally over the counter, or, would you need to consult with a psychiatrist? Yeah. I I I'm gonna kinda pass on that to some degree because I I'm really not deep as deeply interested in lithium as I am deeply more interested in the concept of how does an intelligent and thoughtful person prepare themselves for the next generation of medicine. You know, where your cocktail is highly personalized. Right? And you're no longer shoved into these very broad categories with low inflammation density. You know? Oh, I have bipolar disorder. Oh, great. Thank thanks. You know, that's five percent of the population. You know? You know? Oh, I have high blood pressure. Okay. Thanks. That's forty to seventy. You know, it depends on where people wanna draw the cutoffs. Right? Mhmm. You wanna be able to discover your own unique chemistry. Right? And what will likely happen in the future is, you know, n equals one medicine where, you know, maybe you look at your sleep quality and you compare your sleep quality to normative age related decline. You know, normative. It's not it's pathological, but it's normal. Right? Mhmm. And you take a medication, whether it be lithium, a torsion two inhibitor, or whether it be rapamycin, a torsion one inhibitor, or, you know, whether it be tamoxifen, which is a torsion two inhibitor, or, you know, whatever the the drug of the moment is. And you compare the variance, the normative variance in whatever target molecule you're looking target you're looking at, you know, disturbances and sleep quality. And then you do dose titration, then you say, hey. You know, what at what dose do I seem to look better and feel better? And then when I go too far, I tend to do worse. Right? I mean, it's it's it's highly empirical. It's perturbation. You know, and and our regulatory agencies haven't really embraced this as a as a model of dose fund because it's too expensive. And because they just didn't think that way. That was it was always like, oh, there's a disease. You have it or you don't. Right? And biology is such ridiculous. I mean, it's it's Yeah. It's a sign of a lack of training. You know, if you see a physician and they think in that terms, you know, they're bully. Right? And so our regulatory agencies have to adapt to, you know, the reality of the law of large numbers that things are distributed on a gradient, you know, with occasional incontinuities, but largely smooth surfaces. And as a patient or somebody who's interested in longitude longevity, you have to say, okay. What biomarkers make sense for me, you know, that I can gather at a reasonable cost and have a reasonable amount of reliability? And then now you're on you're on your show right now, and you're saying, hey, is this lithium something that is promising? It's absolutely promising. It's very promising. I think the more your readers look into us, they'll see, you know, this is the conflicts of interest are very low. Right? It's a generic drug. Nobody's making money off of it in general. Right? So you're not going to have to wade through a lot of sociopathy, you know, where the literature gets distorted by people lying to you in order to make money or even, for that matter, to pad your academic credentials, which is a problem. Right? You can you can see a different level of sociopathy. But then the question goes back to what is this dose right for me, and I can't advise you. You know, we just don't we don't have the data for the individual person. You're gonna have to scramble for that data on your own. And it would be nice if you could find a professional who's educated and sympathetic and has experience with using lithium. But there aren't a lot of people out there, you know, who who have the time. You know, they're managing psychiatric patient. How do they move to the next level and manage a much larger population of people who just wanna live longer? You know, we're left with labor constraints that are not easily fixable. Yeah. I guess, you know, AI might have some role in making that test easier. But It's absolutely the role. It's the cure. I mean, we wanna develop an AI program for this sort of thing, and I would develop it tomorrow if I if I had access to people commensurate with my level of skill in terms of managing large databases and doing multivariate optimization. But I can't I can't compete with Meta or with Rock or with OpenAI for those sorts of people. Right? They're gonna be they're busy building Elon's robots and, you know, doing drone warfare. So, you know, how how do someone like me how do I get the capital and and even more importantly, the intellectual talent and to develop this kind of AI that is accessible to larger populations than people who live in my catchment area in Seattle. I mean, that's that's the technology. We need to do this. I mean, it needs to be done. Right? But it's just basic economics. Right? You you you have to have a big enough market out there, you know, to drive capital development so that we're able to create this AI. And it has to be credible. It has to be branded, and people have to understand that the people who are making this AI are not crooks and are doing it to provide real value. And that's that's basic economics, and that's difficult. I mean, that's a that's a that's an intellectual exercise just as challenging as, you know, understanding the basic source code of longevity. We're not gonna get there just with scientists. We need brilliant business people, and we need them just as much as we need the scientists. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. You've also written some papers about repamycin, which, you know, many people know as a potential longevity molecule as well. My question is, like, do you see any synergy between lithium or and rapamycin or some other compounds, because, yeah, you know, rapamycin has a pretty big track record of life life extension in animal species. Humans is, I said more limited. I would even argue that the lithium has probably, like, more longevity evidence in humans than rapamycin, but in animals, rapamycin has more evidence, in my opinion. So do you think they have some potential synergy between the two? The answer is yes. Of course. Right? And so the Drosophage, I think this has been done in a number of animal studies. Right? Where they've added, lithium to rapamycin in Drosophila, and they saw an extra 10% longevity. And and then I think it was done in also a rodent model. I don't I don't have that paper on hand, so I I can't I can't speak to that. Right? So for animals living in a cage, which is not humanity. Right? And we don't know how they feel. Right? There's no you know, biology doesn't care if you're happy. Right? Biologist just wants you to introduce reproduce. Right? So when you ever see these longevity studies where animals are forced to take these drugs, you know, you know, is are they are they living in a hell, you know, or are they living in heaven? We don't we don't know the subjective experience. Right? So you gotta be a little careful about this stuff. Right? Yeah. But there's absolutely animal data that suggests that you get an additive effect. In other words, they're not they're not doing the same thing. Mhmm. Right? Do I have clinical data on that? A 100%. I mean, I have people on lithium and rapamycin, and they do better on the combination than they do alone. And they're not using it for longevity, at least not directly. Right? But they're sick. And when you put the two together, you know, they get much better outcomes. Mhmm. And then the question is as well, who and what dose? I mean, it just goes back to the same old problem. Patient selection and what's the dose. And if you if your listeners will forgive me, I mean, this is just they'll forgive me for this. This is just simple linear algebra. You know, what's the basis space, you know, defined by the eigenvector of lithium and rapamycin response in a biochemical system. And then what's the eigenvalue, you know, which is the dose for lithium and rapamycin. Right? Mhmm. It's it's it's literally just linear algebra. You know, we're we're trying to define a location of a patient or anyone for that matter in a complicated n dimensional biochemical space. And we can define a basis space in terms of lithium and rapamycin effects, you know, if if we have enough very smart people helping us get this data. But we have to scrape the data first, you know, before we can develop the AI. Yeah. Yeah. You you mentioned the the rats being happy then and having no, like, control over over their, you know, in the experiment about what they're given. You know, if you look at the movie, The Matrix, then that's also like a possible scenario with AI that, you know, the AI decides that this is the best dose for you for, you know, whatever they it deems to be our goal. But, we're living in, yeah, like a matrix or some hills is simulation. But, obviously, that that would entail the AI actually becoming way more powerful than it is right now, which may not happen. Well, no. I mean, you know, it's this whole thing about AI taking over our world and stuff like that is complete nonsense. Right? Because we've our we've already gone through this transition. Right? We have mitochondria that live in our body. Right? And they were bacteria that became commensal, and they gave up control of their DNA to to the larger organism in order to survive. And now we have a substantial fraction of our biomass is mitochondrial, and they no longer have autonomy. And that was a good trade off because they they're able to replicate their DNA better. Okay? We're already living in the world of AI. We're already living in the matrix. It's already too late. We're not virgins anymore. Right? If if the Internet goes down, we have a massive, you know, solar flare and the Internet goes down for three to four weeks, that's, you know, two billion people are gonna starve to death. Right? We're already there. Right? So the question is not whether or not we embrace AI in order to help us be happier, have better health span. Of course, we're gonna have to do it. I mean, it's silly to argue otherwise. Right? More of the questions is let's just do it right. You know? Let's not have one person in control of all the resources, come up with some vision of utopia, and make all of us launch March in lockstep, you know, but rather have an AI that is incredibly personalized, that's right for you and your family and the people you care about, and the signal is all local. You know? And and this is what happens in the mitochondria. Right? We the mitochondria DNA, to some degree, is selected for, you know, either to grow or to be eliminated by mitophagy with local signals. So we we want a diversity of thought. You know, we we don't want the pharma complex or the NIH or regulatory agencies, you know, just coming up with these ideas about what's right for everybody. Right? And and we see this in biology. You know, some species breed a lot and die young, and some species breed slowly and dilate. Right? Everything is related to sex and sexual selection at the end of the day. Yeah. Right? And we don't need one species of humans taking over and telling another subspecies of humans about what their values are and what they aren't. Right? And I'm using species as an anthropologist would use it. Right? Which is a species that a species is defined as a population that breeds within itself. Right? And humans clearly selectively breed. Right? And I think, you know, that's obvious. Right? We just it it should be very individual and very personal. Yeah. You mentioned the mitochondria in in a relationship between AI and humans, which one is the mitochondria in that relationship in your opinion? Well, I mean, think about the advantages of silicon. Right? We're stuck with carbon. Right. And we're stuck with our fuel supply eating. You know? I mean, it's so it's so pitiful. You know, when you really think about just how pitiful we are, you know, we get we get I mean, I don't know what the energetics are, you know, but, you know, if you have something like rock and you have to just, like, gigawatts of power, huge amounts of chip supply, you know, of of course, AI is gonna become better than we are at solving intellectual problem. Right? But it doesn't matter because there's no selection pressure on there's no meaning. There's no there's no motivation for silicon. Right? What drives the selection pressure is the survival pressures that have driven humanity. Right? Starvation, predation, sexual competition. You know, all of these things that as an anthropologist, you think about, and you you understand how universal they are, where the psychologists are all thinking about, oh, how do I process information? You know, we don't get crap about it. We care about biological trade off. And we see the remnants of these biological trade offs in the terms of mitochondrial selection, you know, which you're I think what is it, you know, that you we talk about in terms of exercise, a mitochondrial quality control. You know, the mitochondria fused with us years ago, but they still have the same selection pressures. They haven't completely gone away. You know, there are mitochondrial cancers. Right? These are the Cox negative muscle fibers where the mitochondria still exist, but they don't actually produce any ATP. They just replicate themselves. Right? That's a mitochondrial cancer. And if you increase If you increase, PCG one alpha, you know, you you increase these these are these trade offs that are just there everywhere. Yeah. Yeah. Well, it's gonna be very interesting for sure. And, yeah, they're definitely looking forward to more, more studies on lithium as well. But as you said, you know, there is already so much evidence that it has potential longevity benefits, besides the brain benefits. But, yeah, it's been a great discussing with you, before I'll ask my last ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and your work? Well, I'm just a community I'm just I'm just a community psychiatrist, right, you know, who tries to tries to keep my hand in. If you wanna look at our papers on PubMed or Google Scholar, I think the last five years, we've published in some very obscure journals. But it's it's very practical. It's dealing with real people, and it it and I I think I'm proud of the work. And if that's the kind of thing you'd like, you know, take a look at it and see what's coming out. Hopefully, we'll have some new stuff coming out in the next couple of years, especially in the, the Alzheimer's treatment realm. Yeah. That sounds good. And, my last question is, was this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you adopted sooner? One of the psychologists who invented facial recognition scoring became better and better at it every year. And he said, I became so good at it. I could tell when people were lying or not because not all of the facial movements are under voluntary control. Some are involuntary. So he said and he actually, like, trained the CIA how to pick out, you know, who's lying or not. And so he as he matured in his career, and he could see the lies that happened just even in small social interactions. Like, hey. You know, you wanna come over to my house for dinner? And he said, oh, no. I, you know, I've got something else. He said, I realized how destructive it was to my relationship people to lie. You know, that we're we're social individuals, and communicating honestly and directly is the only way that we can have reciprocal connections that we can rely on. And so I think what I'm trying to do, especially in the recent years, you know, watching the rise of medical tyranny, And I and I mean that precisely, you know, where there are large organizations that control large amounts of money, and they wanna control your life in terms of requiring health care payments, that it's just incredibly important to force yourself to be as honest as you possibly can even if it's uncomfortable. It it it's the only way it's the only way to live because if you merge with dishonesty, you it's hard to come back. Mhmm. Yeah. It was a saying that in Estonia that lie lies have short feet, so they they can't get far. So, yeah. Absolutely. Well, yeah, it's been, very interesting and excite very, thought provoking discussion we had. So, yeah, I'm definitely looking forward to your future papers and research. Thank you very much. I appreciate the opportunity. Yes. Thank you.