Long time no q and a. First question, can you get the benefits of collagen by just supplementing with high doses of glycine? If not, why? When it comes to collagen, then the biggest benefit is that it helps with skin aging and reduces the development of wrinkles. Glycine is the biggest amino acid in collagen. So 30% of collagen is, glycine and the glycine contributes to collagen turnover. Now there isn't any direct evidence that glycine would help to reverse this skin aging the same way collagen peptides would do, but, having higher amounts of glycine and adequate amounts of glycine would help with the collagen turnover and thus also have a, you know, beneficial effect on skin aging. You need about twelve grams of glycine for optimal collagen turnover and even higher than that in some cases, we don't necessarily know what's what's the optimal amount of, glycine. But you definitely need large amounts of glycine, something like ten to twelve grams for a collagen turnover. But can you then just take glycine and ignore collagen? Well, collagen peptides also have unique benefits on the collagen synthesis and the skin anti aging that you don't necessarily get, from a glycine. We have this twenty twenty systematic review of the mechanisms of collagen supplementation for skin health, and they identified three different mechanisms of action that, were beneficial for the skin antiaging. And, they are the direct effects of collagen peptides on fibroblasts, which are this type of skin cells, m two like macrophages, which is related to the immune system. So the collagen peptides modulate the immune system in a way that helps with skin and aging, and also just getting the direct, raw material, the precursors for the collagen synthesis. Here, you can see the effects of the collagen peptides on the m two macrophages. So it modulates the immune system and inflammation in a way that leads to the improvement of skin health and collagen synthesis. The collagen derived fragments also suppress autoimmune response against endogenous collagen and that also improves skin health. So generally, collagen peptides and glycine have a different effect on, the skin antiaging. So glycine is more for collagen turnover, recycling collagen, so maintaining adequate, collagen turnover, whereas the collagen peptides are more like direct precursors. They get broken down into the smaller chains of amino acids that modulate the immune system in a different way, the autoimmune response, as well as providing the raw precursors, one of which is glycine. So they have slightly different effects. And for optimal results, you wanna take collagen peptides as well as supplements on glycine. So you wanna take glycine for other reasons as well such as glutathione, general inflammation status, balancing the glycine and methionine ratios, helping visceral fat, helping with blood sugar response, protecting against advanced glycation end products. So there are a lot of other benefits to glycine that you want to take it anyway, but there are also unique benefits for collagen peptides and there's a lot more clinical trials on the collagen peptides themselves that we don't have with regular collagen powder or other protein powders or glycine alone when it comes to skin antiaging and wrinkles. So ideally, you wanna take both. Next question, is there a correlation between blood sugar levels and inflammation? Yes. Hyperglycemia, so elevated blood sugar levels will have an inflammatory response on the body. It also causes a lot of damage to the rest of the organs, so causes glycation and, has, you know, damaging effects on organ function because of that, has damaging effects on skin antiaging. So hyperglycemia, high blood sugar levels are definitely not a very healthy thing. In epidemiological studies, you also probably find an association between elevated blood sugar levels and increased inflammation, which, you know, could be because of various reasons. People who have high blood sugar levels, they tend to follow unhealthier lifestyles. They tend to eat worse diets. They eat more processed foods. They're more sedentary. They might not sleep that much, etcetera. So they have poor metabolic health, insulin resistance, and hyperglycemia, this kind of a metabolic imprint that is then also associated with, increased inflammation levels. But even in mechanistic studies, hyperglycemia elevated blood sugar levels will trigger inflammatory response. So people who have diabetes chronically elevated blood sugar levels, then, they also have much higher inflammation levels. Now this doesn't mean that you need to necessarily suppress your blood sugar levels completely low. You know, you can eat plenty amounts of carbohydrates. You can eat hundreds of grams of carbs while maintaining optimal blood sugar levels, normal blood sugar levels, low blood sugar levels, and also low inflammation levels. So my own metabolic health is excellent. My home IR is, extremely low. My fasting insulin is extremely low. My fasting glucose is low as well. And my CRP, my other inflammatory markers are also extremely low, like close to zero. So it doesn't mean that this elevation in blood sugar whenever you're eating or just eating more carbohydrates would cause inflammation in of itself. You have to look at it more like the entire metabolic imprint, like the what is the metabolic signature of the person because every one of us has different amounts of visceral fat, different amount of incidences activity, different amount of energy requirements, different metabolic rates, different amount of glycogen. So, it's not just that this or that. It's more about, okay, what does your actual what does your blood markers actually say? Do you have high blood sugar? If yes, then there are ways to fix it. Do you have high inflammation levels? If yes, then there are ways to fix it. The most important factors for that is to maintain a physically active lifestyle and to lose weight, mostly body fat. Next question, do you really eat two kiwis before bed every night? So So usually, I have only one single kiwi every night. On some nights, I also had a second one, but, generally, I just eat one. I like the taste. It's, you know, kind of a nice, evening snack. And there is a research that, kiwis do help with sleep. There are studies that two kiwis before a few hours before bed helps with, sleep quality and, the mechanisms probably have to do with serotonin which then helps with melatonin production as well. Do you need to start eating kiwis? Probably not. You can, probably get, the same effects from other types of fruits, Maybe oranges, berries, blueberries, even some healthy carbohydrates. They can all have a similar effects but, I like kiwis and, generally a good way to consume them like in the evening. Next question, no alcohol or sometimes a glass or two? Personally, I don't consume any alcohol. I haven't consumed alcohol for the last, ten, ten years. And, you know, the reason doesn't have to do anything with health. I just don't like it that much. I prefer to, stay sober. And I also don't feel like I need to consume alcohol for whatever reason. I have consumed alcohol maybe once or twice within this time frame of these last ten years. In our in our wedding with our wife, we had, like a glass of wine, etcetera. So it's not something that I'm a 100% against. But I just, you know, don't feel like to consume alcohol and, I never end up in situations where I would want to or end up consuming alcohol. So, yeah, I have no plans of consuming alcohol. When it comes to the research about the health effects of alcohol, then it's, somewhat mixed. Obviously, you have these very famous studies that people say that, you know, drinking one or two glass of wine a day is actually better for your health and it's associated with lower diabetes rates, lower heart disease, greater longevity, etcetera. But, usually that's because of, some other variables such as socioeconomic status, education levels, and, health. So people who are completely sober, they usually do it because of some health related reasons. Now of course there are people like me who just, you know, don't drink alcohol but we are an extreme minority. Less than one percent of the population probably or like a one percent of the population who don't drink alcohol and we don't have any health problems. But most people who don't drink alcohol do it because of either they were previously alcoholics or they have some metabolic health issues or liver issues that prevent them from consuming alcohol medically speaking like they would have some health problems because of that. So, it's it's hard to say if being zero alcohol is worse for you than consuming one or two drinks per day. I I don't think it is the case alcohol is still, toxic in especially in large amounts. Of course, there is the principle of hormesis that small amounts of, a toxin can have health benefits, which is true. And I do think that if you're consuming one drink a night, then, it probably has no long term negative side effects on your health, granted that other things are on point. So one thing that alcohol does is that it can raise your liver enzymes, can also raise your triglycerides, and it can promote the accumulation of visceral fat and liver fat. So if you are someone who has high triglycerides, high liver enzymes, higher amounts of visceral fat than you would like, then cutting down or cutting out the alcohol is one of the most effective ways to improve those markers. So, obviously, you can also be very healthy and have optimal liver enzymes, optimal triglycerides, optimal visceral fat and still consume some amounts of alcohol but it's less likely to be the case. I know a lot of healthy people who consume, you know, a few drinks per week and that they do have slightly higher triglycerides and slightly higher visceral fat than I would personally be comfortable with. But, you know, that it's still everyone's, decision. Maybe that one or two glasses of alcohol every now and then, you know, is is good for your mental health or good for your social health or whatever it is the case. But, there's no inherent health requirement to drink alcohol. That's that's for sure. I personally would believe that keeping it as close to zero is optimal. Maybe you can get away with, yeah, one or two drinks per week at maximum in my opinion. Next question. Can the kidney increase in size if we take creatine and glycine? No. That's definitely not the case that, taking creatine with increased, kidney size and the same applies to glycine is not going to have any effects on your kidney size. The problem actually is that if you have kidney disease or with aging, the older you get, then the kidneys actually decrease in size. So there's no problem that your kidneys enlarge or grow in size similar to your heart or liver, for example. But, the kidneys decline in the size with declining kidney health. So with stage five kidney disease, your kidneys quite sure sure up quite a lot and the same applies to aging. And as a result of that, they can't function that well. They can't filter the blood that effectively and, you end up having some serious health complications and you might potentially die as a result of that. So there is no issue that creatine would increase the kidney size and there's no link between creatine decreasing kidney size either so that it would cause, kidney damage or kidney disease in otherwise healthy people. If you have already existing kidney, disease or kidney damage, then, it is not recommended to take, creatine. This doesn't apply to glycine. You can still take glycine even with, poor, kidney health, but you shouldn't take, creatine if you have kidney disease or kidney damage. Next question, can a daily sauna be too much? Generally, no. You can take the sauna every day if you want to. And, the research suggests that over four times a week or four or greater times per week of sauna use is associated with a significant reductions in heart disease mortality or cause mortality, dementia, Alzheimer's, hypertension, and just immunity as well. So, you can take the sauna pretty much every day if you wish. You know, the only potential issue could be loss of electrolytes and minerals if you're sweating a lot. If you also combine it with exercise, then you can be in a quite severe sodium and other mineral deficits. So if you are going to the sauna everyday, then you might wanna pay more attention to hydration and electrolytes. Maybe consume some electrolyte water, supplement magnesium and, chromium is actually one of the biggest minerals you lose in your sweat in, like, relatively speaking. So, you might need to supplement chromium as well if you are sweating a lot and you're not getting a lot of chromium from your diet. But otherwise, you know, there's no serious health complications, that you could experience if you take the sauna every day and you keep the temperature, you know, moderate. 70 degrees Celsius is the optimal temperature. That's like a 156 degrees Fahrenheit if I'm not mistaken. Higher temperatures than that aren't necessary. There's actually research that 80 degrees Celsius is associated with a like ten year slightly higher increased risk of dementia. That probably might be because of the excess heat. So if it's super hot, then that might have, very long term, very small increased risk of dementia. So like, we're talking about one to two percent increase that was in one of the studies that I, saw. So it's not a serious health concern, but you don't necessarily want to overheat your brain and, body all the time in high temperatures. But moderate heat heat exposure, 70 degrees Celsius is, very beneficial and helps to sweat out a lot of, different, toxins, microplastics, pollutants, heavy metals. It's also been often shown to do so in studies. So I I like it as a daily excretion method. You should sweat every day whether that be with exercise or saunas, but you don't need to do it more than four times, per week. Another issue for men is, sperm health. So excess heat around the testicles, can decrease, sperm production and sperm count. But, it also applies more like direct heat than high temperature heat. So the worst things are, warm baths. Bubble baths, jacuzzis, just even regular hot hot hot tops, hot baths. This, excess heat on the testicles directly is gonna nuke your sperm count if you do it every day for, several minutes in a row. So that that's not like a very healthy thing for men to do but the regular saunas, it's not that big of a effect on a sperm count unless you are doing very high temperatures And you can also mitigate it with, cooling the testicles. So like, some sort of ice pack or a cooling pad, something like that. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices, which are the BonCharge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes. They do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin anti aging, hormone optimization, pain management, and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes, Especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the bond charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most regular Therapeuticers don't have the right wavelengths of light which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Boncharge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research. And they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code SIEM, s I I m, for a 15% discount. Next question. What's the medium path between your almost perfect routine and a normal person's real life? First of all, I don't think I have, some sort of extremely excruciating or a neurotic health routine. Of course I, you know, exercise almost everyday. I, do certain things on a daily basis to maintain my health. But, first of all it's not, you know, for me, subjectively speaking, it's not difficult or it doesn't require discipline or it doesn't require mental effort. So I exercise maybe forty five minutes on average per day. My resistance training workouts are forty five minutes and my zone two cardio is maybe sixty minutes and my HIIT cardio is only thirty minutes. I do it once a week, the HIT cardio. So on average, my daily workout is, forty five, minutes. Does the average person need to exercise every day? Probably not. But you do want to exercise at least three to four times, per week. So a mix of cardio and weights. So at least twice a week for resistance training, ideally three times, and at least once a week zone two cardio, or once a week some form of, high intensity interval training. So anyone can do it in my opinion. You know, you everyone has at least forty five minutes every day to, spend on our health and exercise is the biggest bang for your buck in terms of improving health. If you only have forty five minutes every day to spend on your health, then that time should be spent on exercise. You know, at least maybe thirty minutes should be spent on exercise, fifteen minutes should be spent on something else like relaxation or stretching or something like that, walking, spending time with family or something like that. Besides exercise, when it comes to diet, then I don't also have a very neurotic or strict diet. I actually don't have any real restrictions on my dietary intake. Obviously, I don't consume junk food and ultra processed foods on a regular basis. But, I do consume, you know, some, grains, fruits, berries, legumes, beans, meat, fish, dairy, not seeds. So I consume pretty much all different food groups with the exception of, you know, margarine and, trans fats and those kind of things. So, I don't think there needs to be any, like, a perfect diet for anyone. You can have 80% whole foods diet and you can achieve perfect blood work, perfect health with just that. There's no requirement to have a 100% perfect whole foods diet to be in perfect health and to have perfect, blood work. It's definitely not required. You only need to optimize it for up to like 80%. If you start optimizing for like a 100%, then you might gain, let's say, 1% extra health benefits. But, is it worth it? Is it worth the time investment and, is it worth the extra discipline? Probably not. You can already achieve perfect health and perfect blood markers with, 80%, whole foods diet. And the final thing I wanna mention here is probably walking. So walking is also very beneficial. I walk around 10,000 steps a day. The minimal requirement would be 8,700 steps. That's going to be associated with a sixty percent reduced risk of all cause mortality compared to walking only 2,000 steps a day. And, practically speaking, 8,700 steps is, one and a half hours of walking. And this includes, you know, walking around the house, walking through the store, walking in the office office place. So it doesn't actually have to be that you walk, deliberately one and a half hours. You rack up quite a lot of steps, probably 6,000 steps already with your daily commuting and daily house chores and those kind of things. And, you need to add an additional, you know, 2,000, 3,000 steps with, deliberate walking, which will take you maybe thirty minutes of a deliberate extra walking. Next question, is whey protein overrated? Personally, I think, whey protein is not overrated. I think it's actually underrated. It's, by far the most bioavailable form of protein in the world. It's more bioavailable than, real food because it's concentrated and it's isolated from other ingredients. So you're getting super highly bioavailable optimized for muscle protein synthesis, ingredient. So 30 grams of, whey protein is gonna give you something like 22 grams of protein and, very high amounts of all these essential amino acids that's going to maximize muscle protein synthesis. And, because it's a dairy product, it can also have beneficial effects on your immune system and metabolic health through other means. Now some people obviously are allergic to dairy and whey. They shouldn't consume it if that's the case. But otherwise, healthy people, if they don't have any gut issues, any allergic issues, then whey protein can be a very, beneficial way to ensure you get your adequate daily protein intake for the day. Are protein powders necessary? Absolutely not. You can just eat all whole foods. And, just because whey protein is more bioavailable than beef or, eggs doesn't mean that, you need to consume it. So there is a, yeah, like, a very strange myth on nutrition space that the food you need to eat is needs to be super high available and super nutrient dense all the time. You know, the truth is you can cover all your daily vitamins and minerals with probably, like, 500 calories of, nutrient dense foods. So all of your calories don't need to be super nutrient dense. If 500 of your calories come from some of the nutrient dense foods out there, then you're pretty much getting all the vitamins and minerals, your body needs. But with that being said, whey protein is, you know, the most bioavailable form of protein out there because of the way it's processed, it's, isolated. But that doesn't mean that you need to consume it. It's just, there's no, you know, inherent harm to it if you don't have an allergic response, to dairy or whey. Next question. Beauty wise, is mewing, face sculpting, or massaging a scam or worth it? So mewing refers to this, you know, maintaining a proper tongue posture that helps with nasal breathing and that is supposedly good for your jaw development. So, you know, children who breathe through the mouth, they have, like, a crooked jaw, collapsed jaw, like, underdeveloped jaw, etcetera, and, poorly developed nasal cavities. So you definitely don't wanna be breathing through your mouth and, 90% of the day you wanna spend breathing through the nose. You should breathe only through the mouth when you're doing some form of exercise or if you're talking or you're, you know, very, I don't know, energized or you're running up and down the stairs or something like that. So most of the time you definitely should breathe through the nose. Should you be doing deliberate mewing? You know, I'm not sure about that. Mewing probably can be a therapeutic option for people who have poor breathing patterns, underdeveloped the jaws to, improve upon that slightly. So it's more of a, more of like, I guess physiotherapy for the face in that sense that, some people might need to do. Is it inherently necessary? Like, I'm not mewing but I have like pretty good jawline. I have a pretty good, I guess, a face structure, bone structure as well. And I never, you know, mute in my life. I never mute as a child probably because of what I was breathing through my nose as a child and, you know, I was otherwise healthy as a child. So there's no need for me to do mewing but, it can be quite useful for some individuals. Now the other things that you mentioned, the face sculpting or face massaging, there is actually studies on, you know, face yoga or, deliberate types of face massages that do apparently improve, skin wrinkles and, facial aging as well. Now the thing is that your face, you know, your skin is a muscle. There's a bunch of muscles on your face. With age, those muscles atrophy, they become weaker. So if if the face skin or the face muscles start to sag, then the skin on top of it will also start to sag. So one way to counteract that is obviously to support that with, facial exercises, different types of massages or face yoga exercises. They, probably help with, tightening the muscles of the face and the toning, I guess, the facial muscles. So there is, some element of truth to, to that and I do think that they work and there is some studies actually to support that. Now the one other method to, you know, support that is through like microneedling or radar therapy, taking collagen supplements, etcetera. Like a few supplements out there that have been shown to improve, skin aging. So they can all be supportive but, you know, some facial exercises are probably, a net positive as well. Next question. What are your daily non negotiable fat sources? So I don't have any non negotiable fat sources. I guess the only non negotiable fat source would be my body fat because, you know, that's what you need for survival. You don't need to consume a specific amount of fat every day. Your body can go without dietary fat for quite a long time. You can, you know, not eat anything and you can eat zero fat for, you know, few few weeks probably and be fine. You would lose a lot of body fat in the process. But, you know, your body is very resilient. Your body can convert certain nutrients into dietary fat or triglycerides and use that for energy. Obviously, for optimal health, you need things like omega threes, and other things. But, let's say if I skip a day of certain dietary fats, then, that's fine. But I do try to, like, over the course of the week, I do try to get omega threes and, monounsaturated fats from olive oil, for example, or avocados, etcetera. I'm not a huge, like, I guess, consumer of, dietary saturated fats. Most of my fats come from omega threes, avocados, not seeds, olive oil. I think those are my biggest fat sources. Dairy as well, that has, like, some saturated fats. So, yeah. Most of my fats come from those sources. I only prioritize omega threes and, that's pretty much it. If I need to skip a day of not taking my omega threes or if I consume zero dietary fat for a few days, then I'm gonna be fine because your body is very resilient and you don't need to consume them every single every single day. Obviously, for optimal health, you need to consume them regularly, but, there's no, like, I guess, nonnegotiable that I absolutely need to consume. I would much rather consider protein a nonnegotiable, rather than fat. And, of course, you can go without protein as well for several days without any, problems. Next question, how to heal kidneys? I have no damage, but have high creatinine and eGFR of 73. So it sounds like you have high creatinine levels and your eGFR is low. 73 is, categorized as a initial stage of, kidney disease. But the problem is that eGFR is calculated from creatinine. So because your creatinine levels are high, the calculated eHFR is gonna be low. But you can also calculate eGFR from cystatin c. The problem with creatinine is that it's very sensitive to muscle mass, exercise, how much protein you eat, and whether you supplement creatine or a nut. All those things can increase creatinine levels which then artificially creates the illusion that you have poor kidney function. Whereas, if you have optimal or good normal Cystatin C levels, then your eGFR might be normal. So it's much more important, more accurate to measure your eGFR by looking at your Cystatin C. Of course, creatinine levels matter. If you have extremely high creatinine levels out of the normal range then, that's not a healthy thing either. Even if you are very muscular, you take creatine, you eat protein, you exercise, you shouldn't have extremely high creatinine levels. You know, I I take creatine, I exercise regularly, I have a lot of muscle mass but my creatinine levels are still normal and even, you know, let's say they're not extremely low but they're on the, like, the middle, so like 50 percentile below that. So let's say like on the bottom half of, the reference range. So I have very good creatinine levels relatively speaking to someone who has high amounts of muscle mass and who takes creatine and has, you know, vigorous exercise program. And I also have the optimal Cystatincy levels very low. So my EGR is extremely high because of that. My EGR is like 120, 115, 110 depending on the test. So it's well above a 100 which is, the optimal range. So first of all, you need to calculate your eGFR from Cystatin C. If you haven't measured Cystatin C, measure it and then you can use online calculators, free calculators. I think kidney.org has a calculator where you calculate your eGFR from Cystatin c and it can also calculate it from creatinine if necessary. So first of all, you need to do that. Second of all, how do you heal kidneys? Kidneys can be improved upon unless it's already in, like, a very progressed or severe stage of kidney disease. In the initial stages of kidney disease, it can be improved upon. The biggest harm for the kidneys comes from, high blood pressure and high blood sugar levels. So, hypertension and hyperglycemia, they both, damage the kidneys and, lead to, water retention and, other kind of issues, as a result of that. So fixing the blood pressure with things like so blood pressure is interesting. If you don't have hypertension, then you don't necessarily need to restrict sodium. But if you have high blood pressure, then reducing the sodium is, definitely the most effective way to improve upon the kidney function in the short term. So if you have a high blood pressure, cutting the sodium to something like fifteen hundred milligrams or a thousand milligrams a day is going to, in the short term, very quickly help to lower the blood pressure and also improve our kidney function as a result of that. Other things, for blood pressure is obviously, blood sugar levels and insulin sensitivity. You need to fix that as well. You know, there's multiple ways to improve blood sugar levels. You can go on a low fat diet or you can also go on a low carb diet. Both can work, but the most important thing is, I guess, using that extra energy, using those, glucose molecules for fuel. And, that entails increasing your energy expenditure, losing weight, improving insulin sensitivity, helping the body to produce insulin to shallow the glucose into the cells. So, exercise, weight loss, some form of dietary restriction, whether that be fat or carbohydrate restriction, ideally both, that would be, like, the fastest way to improve, blood sugar levels and improve blood pressure as well to go on a lower carb, lower fat diet, which just entails, like I said, your calorie restriction. Fasting is also a very powerful way to improve, blood pressure as well as, blood sugar levels, obviously, because you're not eating anything. Your body uses the glucose for fuel and, in the in the process, you'll experience, a drop in blood pressure as well. And the kidneys will, automatically improve as a result of that. So, you know, there's no single answer. It all depends on the individual what is their issue of why they have high blood pressure or high blood sugar or poor kidney function. But in most cases, it entails modifying the diet, exercising, lowering, let's say, sodium intake, lowering carbs and fat intake, sleeping properly, managing stress. Saunas probably can also help with, blood pressure, through, excreting water and sodium. And they also have insulin synthesizing effects, so they improve, blood sugar levels. Next question. I'm not overweight. I eat two grams per kilogram of protein. I lift heavy, but I have a small belly. Why? So I guess you have this small, round belly or a pot belly at the bottom of your abs. You know, first of all, the belly, the abdomen is the last place you lose fat upon. So to get abs, especially to lose fat on the lower abs, you need to be in a very lower body fat percentage. So if you don't see your abs, you have a small belly, then you just need to lose more weight. And, it doesn't matter how much you exercise. If you're not in a calorie deficit, then, you're not going to lose a fat either. So I guess the biggest recommendation would be to look at your calorie intake, you know, go through a few days of tracking weigh all the food, track it, see how many calories and fats and carbs and proteins are you actually eating. There is a huge discrepancy between how much people think they eat versus how much they actually eat. So and especially like it's very associated with ORE people. Now I'm not trying to like, you know, fat shame people or something like that but, ORE people are very bad at estimating how many calories are they actually eating and they underestimated by several hundreds of calories. So they might think that, okay, I'm eating 1,500 calories but in reality they're eating 2,000 or 2,500 calories. That's, extremely common. Even even registered dietitians and nutritionists are very bad at actually estimating how many calories are they eating because it's, you know, virtually it's very hard to do with your eyes. You need to actually weigh the food and see how much calories and grams it has. So going through a few days of weighing all the food, calculating the calories, tracking them is very eye opening in that sense that, you will see, you will realize, okay, this much food actually has this much calories. You know, you would be surprised how small the serving sizes actually are visually. You might think, okay, a serving of ice cream or whatever is this much but it's actually this much. So you're putting one serving but you end up getting two or three servings. So you're getting double the amount of calories than you thought you were. So, that's just, you know, I guess, unfortunate, reality that people are very bad at estimating calories. We can't do it visually that well. We need to track it. Unless you're a super extreme, bodybuilder or very experienced with tracking, you know, those people are like laser size laser eyes. I'm also quite good at estimating the calorie intake visually because, you know, seven, eight years ago, I was tracking everything for a few, months and I developed this, you know, understanding about the different calorie amounts and different, macro amounts of different foods as well. So I can already estimate, okay, how much protein am I getting? How many calories am I getting approximately? You don't need to be a 100% precise with it, but you need to get it at least into the plus and minus 10%, range of accuracy. The second thing, you know, protein intake, yes, higher protein intake can help with weight loss but not in the absence of calorie restriction. So if you eat, I don't know, 500 grams of protein a day, yes, you will lose a lot of those calories for digesting the protein. About 30% of those those calories will be spent on digesting the protein. But it doesn't mean that, eating extra protein couldn't prevent you from losing fat. So you can still gain fat by eating, you know, enormous amounts of protein, contrary to what some people might say. So, protein isn't free calories. Protein is less calories than you're eating. Right? So you're spending some calories on digesting the protein, but you can still over consume calories by eating too much protein. And two grams per kilogram per day is more than enough. Now I'm not saying that you need to reduce that protein intake, but, it might be that some of those extra calories that are preventing you from losing the belly fat are in protein. It can also be fats and carbs. Like, you ideally need to restrict all the calories or reduce them slightly, to reach a calorie deficit. But, you know, 1.6 grams per kilogram is already enough for maximal muscle growth and you don't inherently need more than that. So you can already cut down on some of the protein to, reach the calorie deficit. And the other calories probably come from added fats. You know, fats are even harder to detect than other foods because they're very small and they're very calorie dense. Like, a tablespoon of oil, tablespoon of olive oil is over a 100 calories and you can easily add three, four tablespoons of oil to your salad without even noticing. And, you don't visibly see the fat if it's mixed together with the vegetables or other foods. So it's, definitely a huge source of extra calories for a lot of people. The next thing would be training the abdomen as well directly. You can sculpt your abs slightly by treating them as another compound, exercise. So usually people train abs by doing hundreds of crunches. Right? So you're not directly, you know, burning calories in the abdomen. But if you have more sculpted abs, bigger muscles as abs, then, those abs will be more visible even at higher body fat percentages. So doing things like hanging knee raises or hanging leg raises, doing things like the ab wheel rollouts, the preacher I think it's the preacher crunches or something, where you're doing like heavy weights, crunches. Doing heavier lifts with the 40 abs rather than doing hundreds of crunches will also help to define the abdomen muscles slightly and make them more visible even at higher body fat percentage. For the last bit of, belly fat at the bottom of the abs, you know, under the belly button, you need to be dieting more and, lose more body fat, generally because that's the last literally the last place where you will lose, the the body fat, from. There's also some research that combining aerobic exercise with specific, ab exercises, can quote unquote spot reduce fat on the abs. So there was a study from two years ago where they did several sets of ab exercises followed by thirty minutes of cardio or something like that. So there first, you train the abs with some, exercises and then doing cardio after that apparently has some spot reducing, effect. So you can, try that as well. Next question. Routine for tendon injury recovery. So tendons are very tricky because, they're smaller joints and they don't have very good, blood flow. So that's the reason why it takes such a long time for tendons like your elbows to recover. So one way to, support the recovery is to obviously still move if you're completely stagnant. Like, if you if you break an arm and you are put in a cast, then, your muscles will atrophy because you're not using it. And it takes a longer time actually, counterproductively, to recover. So what you wanna do is still use the, tendon and the arm or the limb that is injured and, do, like, easier exercises. You obviously want you don't wanna do heavy lifts with the injured tendon, but doing some lighter exercises, even squeezing or, you know, moving the fingers or just squeezing the muscles a little bit, that can help with, the recovery because of directing more blood flow to the region. There's things like the KATU bands that I find extremely helpful in this scenario because the KATU bands, they restrict blood flow slightly into the limb or they restrict the blood going out. They don't restrict it going in. So then the blood pools into the limb and you get this swelling effect. You you get an extremely good pump by using blood flow restriction bands and you can stimulate the muscles in a way that you would lift heavy weights without actually overloading the joints. So the Katsu bands or blood flow restriction bands are extremely good for different kinds of injuries like tendons and, knee injuries. You just put them on and, do very light exercises. You can just even lift your phone or something else like a small ball, and you will get on, like, an extremely good pump. The second after that, you can also use some peptides. BPC one hundred and fifty seven is notorious for tendon joint injuries. I've also used it myself. There are thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of people online who have also used PPC for accelerating tendon injuries. They appear to work extremely well and, oftentimes people who've had some long term injuries, injuries that come back, they can be resolved with some PPC because, PPC stimulates angiogenesis, the growth of new blood vessels. It helps different kinds of growth pathways, and there's recovery pathways that it has anti inflammatory effects. So, it's, extremely effective for, tendon injuries specifically. And you can also take it orally so you don't need to inject it. You don't need to mix it and inject it. You can just take oral tinctures or there's also oral capsules. Yes. The oral PPC is, less bioavailable than the injectable one but most people don't like to inject things, me included. So taking the PPC orally is still better than, than not taking it in my opinion. Collagen can help with tendon injuries but it's not as effective as, physical movement and, PPC. Next question. Do you recommend HRT for menopause? HRT stands for hormone replacement therapy. Now, obviously, this is a conversation you need to have with your doctor or some other medical, professional. But in my opinion, HRT is is gonna be life changing for most women after menopause. The reason being, menopause, you know, completely wipes out your natural estrogen levels and, that increases the risk of frailty, increases the risk of Alzheimer's, increases the risk of heart disease. So after menopause, all the risk of these, chronic diseases increases for women exponentially and, not to mention the quality of life. You know, the low estrogen state has a severe negative effects on your mental health, your physical health, your energy levels, your sleep, your aesthetics. You'll you'll look older as well as a result of that so I don't see any, you know, reason why someone wouldn't want to do HRT as a woman after menopause. And of course, obviously, this is something you need to discuss with your doctor if, you are a good candidate or not. And you should do, like, your own research about it to see what are the pros and cons and evaluate it yourself. But, you know, my wife is probably gonna do HRT after menopause. She's already, you know, decided upon that. If I was a woman after menopause, I would also probably do HRT because, yeah, the decline in hormones for women goes off the cliff. For men, you can maintain quite high testosterone levels naturally even into your elderly years because the testosterone decreases, you know, gradually and you can still maintain it quite high with a healthy lifestyle. Whereas for women, it literally drops off a cliff and there's nothing you can do about it. Women will hit menopause at some point. Some some do it later. Some do it earlier. But it's gonna happen at some point. And and after that happens, you will experience a decline in, the quality of life and physical health. Now whether or not someone should do the HRT, that is, yeah, their own, decision and they need to evaluate it and, evaluate the pros and cons. I guess one fear people have is that HRT increases the risk of breast cancer or other types of cancer. According to my research, then that's not the case. That, that's been debunked already for quite a long time, and there's never there's never been a significant increase in the risk of cancer that would mean that women shouldn't do HRT, at least based on my research. And the last question is, is there a key point for skin face rejuvenation? Now with age, there's a lot of things that change with the face and skin health. First of all is, you know, decline in collagen and hyaluronic acid and other elastin and those things that maintain the skin supplements. There's also the decline in the facial muscles, the muscle atrophy so that your skin starts to sag as a result of that. There's also photoaging, so sun damage, all those things, they contribute to, facial aging and, developing wrinkles and looking older. And it shouldn't be like you focus only on one thing or the other. You need to look at them all together because they all contribute to skin aging in different ways. Probably the most significant effect is photoaging. So if you look at someone who is 90 years old, then, all of these decades of exposure to the sun has made the skin a lot more wrinkled and photodamaged as someone who is only 20 years old and they've been exposed to the sun for, you know, ten, twenty years. So, over the course of decades, sun UV radiation is the biggest contributor to intrinsic skin aging as it's called. So, it increases the senescence cell burden in the skin because of the DNA damage from the UV radiation and, also breaks down collagen, makes the skin very thick and, I guess more gravelly or gravelly, like, like ground. Of course, they're a help and if it's the sun, you don't wanna avoid the sun. I definitely don't recommend that. You wanna get healthy amounts of sun exposure. But, when we're talking purely about the aesthetic side and the the skin antiaging side, then, extra sun is the biggest reason for, skin aging. Now there are ways to get around it. You you can, be mindful about your sun exposure. You can use sunscreen, in different scenarios if you need to. I think the most important thing is to just not roast out in the sun for many hours, especially at the midday when the sun is the hottest, the UV index is the hottest. The healthiest sun exposure is in the morning and the evening for both your skin health as well as for your circadian rhythms. You wanna get the morning, circadian signal for for starting the day. And in the evening, you wanna get the signal that the day is ending and you wanna prepare for sleep. In the midday, you get mostly the vitamin d benefits, but, you know, thirty minutes is already enough to get your daily requirement for vitamin d. So there's no inherent need to, sunbathe or be outside in the sun for many hours unless you're gonna unless you wanna get a tan. But, getting the tan is also going to, you know, accelerate the skin aging. There's also things like, Azaxanthin and other carotenoids that help to protect the the skin. I think like green tea, the EGC in green tea, chlorogenic acid in, coffee, vitamin c, vitamin e, they all help to protect your skin against the sun as well. So they work like this internal sunscreen. So if you are taking asexanthin, twelve milligrams, twenty four milligrams even, then that will, increase your skin's tolerance to the UV radiation and reduces the risk of getting sunburns and, reduces the the skin aging effects of, UV radiation as well. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.