You've probably heard that microplastics can mess with your fertility, hormones, and maybe even increase the risk of heart disease. But here's what almost nobody talks about, their impact on your gut health. In 2023, a French study in the journal of hazardous materials found the first direct evidence that microplastics damage your gut microbiota and weaken the intestinal barrier. When that barrier breaks down, these particles can slip into your bloodstream and travel to places you really don't want them to, like your brain, kidneys, or testicles. That's the bad news. But here's the good news. There's emerging research showing that certain probiotics and prebiotics can not only protect your gut from this damage, but actually help excrete microplastics from your body. In this video, I'm walking you through these exact strains of bacteria backed by science. Exposure to microplastics has been seen to disrupt the gut microbiome by increasing harmful bacteria like Heliobacteribilis and Clostridium cochleatum. They also decrease beneficial bacteria like Clostridialis, Bacterioidialis, and Ricannellosia. This shift in the microbiome alters metabolites leading to immune dysregulation and inflammation. As a result, you have negative effects on male and female reproductive organs and the brain. A 2021 study from China also found that people with irritable bowel disease had a higher amount of microplastics in their stool. What it means is that people with IBD either eat a lot more foods that contain microplastics or the microplastics mechanistically promote the development of gut problems including IBD. One of the most common gut health foods you hear about are probiotic fermented foods. There are studies finding that certain bacterial strains found in fermented foods can degrade chemicals in plastic products such as BPA. In a 2023 study, male mice were exposed to microplastics and then given probiotics. What they found was that the probiotics reduced inflammation and restored the decline in sperm quality caused by the microplastics. A 2025 study saw that giving mice the probiotic strains, Lactic Acetylus parasasif d t 66 and Lactiplantibacillus plantarum d t 88 increased polystyrene excretion by 34% and reduced residual polystyrene particles in the intestine by 67%. That's massive. So what kind of probiotic foods degrade these microplastics? I'm gonna give you the list of the ones that have been researched. Lactobacillus reuteri, you can get from fermented yogurt, cheese, pickles, tempeh, and miso. Lactobacillus acidophilus, you can get the most from yogurt and kefir, but also sauerkraut and kombucha. Like the Bacillus plantarum is found in sauerkraut, pickles, sourdough bread, and brined olives. There are also other foods with similar benefits. Anthocyanins found in blueberries and fruit aren't probiotics, but they're also investigated as potential options for mitigating microplastic induced toxicity. Inulin and beta glucans found in oats have also been shown to reduce the amount of forever chemicals called PFAS in mice. To address the intestinal inflammation and permeability, you can also supplement glutamine because it's the amino acid that maintains tight junction and intestinal permeability. A 2024 meta analysis of clinical trials saw that thirty grams of glutamine a day for less than two weeks was able to reduce intestinal permeability. With less intestinal permeability, fewer microplastics get into the bloodstream. If I were to sum it up, then eat more fermented foods like kefir, yogurt, sauerkraut, pickles, miso, tempeh, and kimchi. You also wanna incorporate colorful pigments that contain anthocyanins like blueberries. Some individuals with foods and activities and gut problems might not react well to fermented foods. Fermented foods contain a lot of histamine because they're aged, which can cause allergy like symptoms. Histamine intolerance arises primarily from a deficiency in the enzyme called diamine oxidase, d a o, that breaks down histamine, which can be supplemented if necessary. You can get histamine from not only fermented foods, but also processed meat, alcohol, and just food that's been sitting in the fridge for too many days. If you are sensitive to histamine, then you might not do well with fermented foods, but you can still contain the other foods that help with microplastics, namely the colorful fruits and vegetables like sweet potatoes, blueberries, and oats. Alright. Let me give you more tips for reducing the burden of microplastics on your body. Minimize plastics in your life. Replace plastic bottles and plastic tupperware with glass bottles and glass boxes. Some foods also contain more microplastics because of being stored in a plastic container. Canned fish, canned fruit, canned vegetables, they all contain microplastics because of the plastic coating on the tin. But meat and fish stored in plastic wrappers have also been seen to contain millions of microplastics. So you wanna try to opt for either frozen food or minimize the one wrapped in plastic. Keep your gut barrier working optimally. For that, you need to eat enough protein as well as the probiotic foods. Eat foods that have a lot of probiotics and fiber such as fermented vegetables, sauerkraut, kimchi, fermented dairy, oats, blueberries, and mushrooms. One of the more shocking discoveries about the microplastics over the last few years is that your brain can contain a spoonful of microplastics. If you want to know how to remove microplastics from your brain then check out this video next.