I took a hundred and twenty milligrams of melatonin every night for a week. That's about a 100 times higher than a normal dose for sleep. Why? Because there's fascinating research showing that when melatonin is taken at very high doses, ten, a hundred even three thousand milligrams it acts as a powerful antioxidant and anti inflammatory compound that could play a role in longevity. In this video I'll share exactly what happened and what the science says about high dose melatonin. Okay, so what did I experience? To be honest when I was going into this experiment then I thought I'm gonna feel very groggy and tired in the morning after taking a hundred and twenty milligrams melatonin. In the past I've taken ten milligrams or slightly higher and that already made me feel quite tired and letharging in the morning. But surprisingly I didn't feel tired in the morning after taking a hundred and twenty milligrams which is the complete opposite of what I was expecting. The biggest thing I noticed was that I woke up at 4AM every night which is also quite surprising. When I opened my eyes then I checked the clock, it was 4AM and I felt like I just slept eight hours straight but in reality I slept only six hours. Now I can't say it was a 100% because of the melatonin but, it wouldn't have been a placebo effect either because I thought the melatonin would make me feel more tired rather than untired. Maybe one theory is that the high antioxidant effect of melatonin in large doses eliminated my sleep pressure or lowered my sleep pressure so I felt more refreshed and more recovered with less sleep. That's one theory. But melatonin also has a lot of individual effects. Everyone reacts very differently to melatonin. Some people have lower doses causing them grogginess, other people get grogginess from higher doses. I got the grogginess from ten milligrams but I didn't get it from a hundred and twenty milligrams. So that was a kind of positive surprising effect that I didn't expect. I was able to sleep shorter and feel as recovered as I slept seven to eight hours. One big side effect I did notice during the daytime was I was getting some mild minor headache that lasted for a few hours during the daytime and I was also maybe a bit more irritated which is very very surprising because I'm usually not irritated at all. Like, I never get irritated, I never get angry or anything like that and I never get a headache either. So there was something specific in the melatonin that was causing me a small headache and made me a bit more irritated. Maybe the irritation came from the small headache but regardless I did get a very small, a minor headache for a few hours during daytime. Alright, now let's talk about the research on this megadose or much rather gigadose melatonin. Russell Reiter PHD has been pioneering this melatonin research for decades and he's still doing research in his eighties. He's written extensive papers on the antioxidant and anti inflammatory effects of melatonin. Mechanistically, melatonin inhibits cancer in multiple stages by preventing mutations and actively killing cancer cells via pro oxidant effects in tumor cells. So it has selective antioxidant effects in healthy cells and pro oxidant effects in tumor cells. Melatonin also enhances sensitivity to other cancer therapies and protects against radiation. But is it safe? There's a large 2021 meta analysis of 79 clinical trials on over 3,800 participants and they used melatonin from ten milligrams all the way up to three thousand milligrams. They found that there were limited adverse effects reported and melatonin had a generally good safety profile. Overall, the studies saw better sleep regulation in dementia patients and anti amyloid and neuroprotective effects which might be useful for neurodegenerative diseases. Melatonin combined with chemotherapy in cancer patients was seen to improve the tolerability of chemo and had possible anti tumor effects. The patients also had less anorexia and less fatigue. In heart disease patients, melatonin lowered blood pressure, improved cholesterol, and lowered inflammation markers. In COVID nineteen patients, melatonin had immunomodulatory and anti inflammatory effects which might support the immune system during sickness but there isn't enough research on that yet. 11 studies out of these 79 studies specifically used a dose of a hundred milligrams up to three thousand milligrams. In this 2020 study, healthy males between age 25 to 35 were given a hundred milligrams of melatonin one to two hours before exposure to radiation and as a result of that they saw less DNA damage. In a 2018 clinical trial, infertile men with varicoceles which is a condition of enlarged veins in the scrotum that impairs blood flow to the testicles went through a surgical procedure that removed those enlarged veins. After the surgery, some of them were given four hundred milligrams of melatonin daily and after three months, sperm parameters like sperm concentration, motility, and proportions were significantly better than the placebo group. The melatonin group actually had lower total sperm count on average before the surgery but after receiving the melatonin they had significantly higher sperm count. So melatonin protects the sperm. A twenty twenty five study on older people from age 55 to 98 with comorbidities saw that melatonin at a dose of forty to two hundred milligrams was seen to improve sleep as well as hypertension, ischemic heart disease and diabetes. In this 2017 clinical trial on women transitioning through menopause, six months of two grams of myo inositol plus three thousand milligrams of melatonin per day improved glucose metabolism significantly whereas myo inositol alone improved only thyroid functioning. A 1991 study on women saw that both two point five and one thousand milligrams of melatonin enhanced luteinizing hormone pulse amplitude which means that diurnal surges in luteinizing hormone were larger. Luteinizing hormone is a precursor to sex hormones and it contradicts the idea that melatonin lowers testosterone or estrogen. Another 1993 study in young men saw that melatonin didn't lower testosterone or luteinizing hormone either. However, melatonin does raise growth hormone. A 1987 study saw that five hundred milligrams of melatonin after forty five minutes rose growth hormone by 222%. That's because melatonin inhibits somatostatin also known as growth hormone inhibiting hormone. But you don't need to take five hundred milligrams to raise growth hormone. A previous study saw that five milligrams already increased growth hormone by a 160%. Lastly, a 2011 study on liver operation patients saw that fifty milligrams per kilogram of melatonin which for a seventy kilogram person was 3,500 accelerated recovery from the ICU and lowered liver enzymes compared to placebo. This means they had reduced liver injury and faster recovery from the surgery. So overall, there is quite interesting research about giga dosing melatonin but we definitely need more clinical trials on this. Fortunately, there's also research on slightly smaller dose melatonin which, you know, ten milligrams sounds a lot compared to one milligram but ten milligrams is a lot smaller than a hundred or three thousand milligrams. Research on ten milligram melatonin shows improvements in lipids and lower inflammation and we have plenty of clinical trials on that topic. The majority of people don't need to take a hundred milligrams of melatonin and they probably shouldn't. For sleep, a dose of one to three milligrams is already enough and if you want to improve inflammation markers or your cholesterol profile or lipids and blood sugar then ten milligram already does the job. A hundred milligrams or more might be only useful in certain medical conditions. A common question is that isn't this going to suppress your natural melatonin production? Maybe one milligram isn't gonna do it but a hundred milligrams is definitely gonna do it right? Well, research on doses of fifty milligrams has shown that it does not suppress natural melatonin production. But fifty milligrams is half the dose of what I took. However, a study on a hundred milligrams of melatonin also saw no suppression of natural melatonin production. So there's nothing to really worry about in terms of natural melatonin production. Melatonin doesn't work like testosterone. There's no negative feedback loop. Melatonin is mostly regulated by the day and night cycles, light exposure, food intake, etcetera. Melatonin levels decline with age significantly and there's research that high dose melatonin could help to fix some of that by improving circadian regulation of cortisol which also declines with age. What's clear is that as you get older, your body produces less melatonin which is bad for your sleep and also bad for your overall inflammation status. So elderly people might benefit from larger dose melatonin, maybe not a hundred milligrams but potentially ten milligrams. Another issue with oral melatonin is that the bioavailability is around 15%. It means that when I was taking a hundred and twenty milligrams, I only absorbed around eighteen milligrams. If you take ten milligrams, you absorb one point five milligrams. The eighteen milligrams is still significantly higher than what your body would produce naturally and the 15% of ten milligrams, one point five milligrams is closer to what your body would produce naturally. So it highlights the importance that if you are supplementing oral melatonin, you actually need a higher dose than you think. One milligram melatonin will give you actually very little amount of melatonin. Alright. So what's the main takeaway? Megadosing and gigadosing melatonin is a very interesting research topic and I hope that we get more clinical trials on this in various health conditions. For me, I had unexpected results. I didn't see any grogginess or tiredness. The next day when I was taking one hundred and twenty milligrams of melatonin, I actually had shorter sleep and I felt more recovered and refreshed from that shorter sleep. However, I did notice a headache that lasted for a few hours. So I'm not gonna be taking a hundred and twenty or a hundred milligrams melatonin on a regular basis for that reason. Overall, I think melatonin is a god tier supplement for all the research that I mentioned in this video. I ranked a 100 supplements in general from worst to best. Check out the video for all the other supplements next.