About a month ago, I took twenty eight grams of creatine every day for a week to see how it affects my performance after sleep deprivation. I did notice some benefits. Besides the thumbnail, one of the most common questions I got asked was, isn't this bad for your kidneys? Rip kidneys. Did you measure your kidney markers? Well, in this video, I'll share my kidney results before and after doing this experiment. I'll share the right and wrong kidney markers to focus on and what are the optimal ranges. Basically, I started taking creatine at the January before which I was taking zero creatine. I was taking the optimal standard dose of a hundred milligrams per kilogram per day, which for me is eight grams. And I did that for about one and a half months. Then I took twenty eight grams for a week in March and returned to eight grams a day until mid April. I was also taking twenty grams of creatine for about three to five days at the April when I was traveling. Here are my kidney results from January 2025, which is before I started taking creatine. As you can see, my kidneys are in perfect condition based on this test. Everything is in the optimal zone. EGFR, a 108. Creatinine, zero point ninety five milligrams per deciliter. Uric acid, four point four seven milligrams per deciliter. Bloodurea nitrogen, eighteen point sixty four milligrams per deciliter. Cystatin c, zero point sixty seven milligrams per liter, and sodium, a hundred and forty one point five millimoles per liter. Here are my kidney results in April three months after taking creatine. EGRFR, a 105, creatinine in zero point ninety seven milligrams per deciliter, uric acid five point seventeen milligrams per deciliter, blood urea nitrogen nineteen point sixty nine milligrams per deciliter, cystatin c zero point sixty five milligrams per liter, and sodium a hundred and forty point nine millimoles per liter. Statistically speaking, everything is pretty much the same with no real difference. As you can see, my creatinine levels increased only slightly by 0.02 milligrams per deciliter, which is insignificant. And my EGRF R dropped from a 108 to a 105, which is also insignificant. The reason for this might not have to do with creatine at all because creatinine levels increase the more muscle you have. And between these three months, I went on a mini bulk and increased my weight from seventy nine kilograms to eighty three kilograms, and I added at least two kilograms of muscle plus a little bit of fat. This was a deliberate bulk for me as I wanted to focus on strength training, and it's the ultimate reason I started taking creatine again. I'm going to share with you the optimal ranges for these skimmie markers quite shortly. I knew that taking creatine wasn't going to mess up my kidneys even if I did a large dose for a week. That's because creatine supplementation hasn't been seen to damage or reduce kidney function in otherwise healthy people. It's well established that creatine supplements are safe and they don't cause kidney damage. Only people with already existing kidney disease have to be careful with creatine. Even people doing resistance training and eating a high protein diet haven't seen creatine affect kidney function after twelve weeks. Kidney disease is usually caused by some other conditions such as hypertension or high blood sugar. Creatine hasn't been seen to be a causal factor in causing kidney disease, but it can make things worse if you have poor kidney function. So let's talk about how do you know if you have good kidney function. The most commonly used biomarker for kidney function is creatinine, which is not the same as creatine, although they sound similar. Creatinine is a byproduct of phosphocreatine from protein metabolism or body protein breakdown. It means that if you eat more protein or you exercise, you'll have higher creatinine levels because you cause muscle damage during exercise. The issue is that if you're a person with slightly more muscle mass, you'll also have elevated creatinine levels because of that reason. You can see from studies that the more muscle mass and the higher your muscle strength, the higher your creatinine levels are. That's why creatinine isn't the best marker of kidney health in people who exercise or who have more muscle. This is why you saw my creatinine levels increase from 0.95 to 0.97 milligrams per deciliter. It had nothing to do with creatine, but more to do with the increase in my muscle mass. The normal reference range for serum creatinine is zero point seventy four to one point thirty five milligrams per deciliter for men and zero point fifty nine to one point zero four milligrams per deciliter for women. So my result of zero point ninety seven milligrams is in the optimal zone and it's straight in the middle. Even though I was taking a lot of creatine and I have more muscle than the average person. But looking at only creatinine is very misleading. A better marker of kidney health is Cystatin c because it's not affected by muscle mass or exercise. Cystatin c is a protein found in all bodily tissues and fluids. With normal kidney function, glomerular filtration clears cystatin c levels from the blood. During kidney dysfunction, cystatin c levels rise. Normal cystatin c levels are 0.62 to 1.15 milligrams per liter. The higher the Cystatin c levels, the worse your kidney health. My Cystatin c levels went from 0.67 to 0.65 milligrams per liter, which is in the most optimal range. Based on all of this, my kidney function is very good, but not because of taking creatine. Creatine just doesn't have significant effects on kidney function if you're otherwise healthy. Your overall kidney function is assessed by eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate, which reflects how much blood passes through the tiny filters in the kidneys called the glomeruli that filter waste material from the blood. Normal eGFR levels are above a 100. Anything below a 100 indicates kidney problems. And the lower the eGFR, the more advanced the stage of kidney disease. The problem is that eGFR is usually calculated from creatinine. And as we already know, creatinine levels can be often misleading if you have more muscle mass, you exercise more, and you have more muscle strength. This might create a false interpretation of kidney dysfunction in otherwise healthy people. Instead, you should calculate EGFR from Cystatin c because Cystatin c is less sensitive to muscle mass. You can use the EGFR calculator at the National Kidney Foundation website, kidney.org, to calculate EGRFR and see the results for both creatinine and cystatin c. My eGFR based on my January results was a 110 when calculated from creatinine, and a 129 when calculated from cystatin c, and a 123 when calculated from both. My eGFR based on my April results was a 108 when calculated from creatinine, and a 130 when calculated from Cystatin c, and a 123 when calculated from both. That's again an insignificant difference. So as you can see, taking large amounts of creatine didn't have any real effects on my kidney function because my kidney markers were already pretty optimal to begin with. Someone with poor kidney function might have seen a different result. But overall, you don't have to take massive amounts of creatine. The optimal dose for maintenance purposes is a hundred milligrams per kilogram per day. And if you do experience some sleep deprivation every once in a while or you have jet lag, then you can take some larger doses of creatine, something like zero point thirty five grams per kilogram, which for me was twenty eight grams. If you want to see other supplements that are evidence based and worth to take, then check out this video next.