Recently I ranked a 100 of the most popular supplements from worst to best. In this video I'm going to focus only on the longevity supplements that have either been seen to extend lifespan in animals or they might have some potential longevity effects in humans. Time stamps for everything are down below. Alright, let's begin. First one, taurine. So taurine is quite interesting. There is animal research that, it has been seen to extend lifespan in mice. From two years ago there was the study. And in humans we have quite a lot of clinical trials showing that it improves aspects of metabolic health. So it's relatively safe, little to no side effects, it improves exercise performance, improves blood markers and in animals it has been seen to extend lifespan. So based on this criteria I would put it into the gut tier. Because, you know, obviously we can't say or know if taurine is going to extend lifespan in humans but, you know, the human studies indicate that it does help with the many aspects of overall health. And human longevity, you know, the best way to track it is, yeah, just make sure you have a lower risk of these chronic diseases like lower risk of heart disease, Alzheimer's and metabolic syndrome and diabetes, etc. That would shorten your lifespan. So something that would reduce that risk would be, quite useful. Apigenin, you know, apigenin mostly helps with, again, the NAD metabolism. It inhibits CD38, which is a glycoprotein that lowers your NAD levels. Now there isn't any strong evidence that Apigenin would extend animal lifespan and obviously human research is much more limited. So I would put it in the okay tier. I do think that inhibiting CD38 with something like Apigenin would be a part of a longevity stack and would be part of a longevity strategy when we're talking about, long term longevity. Resveratrol, now many people think that Resveratrol is one of the best longevity supplements out there but, but, you know, the actual high quality animal studies even don't suggest that it is a life extension molecule. It was seen to extend lifespan only under one condition which is essentially like metabolic syndrome and obesity. So mice who are fed and obesity during diet, they have pretty much like obesity and diabetes, then resveratrol does extend their lifespan. But But it doesn't really do that under other conditions and human research also suggests that resveratrol improves lipids and blood sugar and inflammation markers only if you have diabetes or metabolic syndrome. And it might have some negative effects as well on things like reducing the benefits you get from exercise and reducing your VA2 max adaptation. So it's definitely not a useful supplement for an otherwise healthy individual in my opinion and the animal data also suggests that it's not particularly, effective. So, you know, I would put it in the junk tier based on all of that. But, in the previous video, the 100 supplement ranking, I did put it in the junk tier. But here, when we're talking about just longevity, I'll just put it in the bad tier. Because, yes, under certain conditions, under certain criteria it might have some effects but it's not really that effective. Now Rapamycin, obviously, is not a supplement. I'm just gonna put it into this video again because people just ask about it. What do you think about Rapamycin? And it's one of the more, you know, biggest candidate for extending human lifespan as well. There's no evidence that it would do so currently but, rapamycin is the most consistently shown, is a molecule that's been seen to extend animal lifespan most consistently in different organisms. And most potently as well. So obviously based on that it would be just got here, from a perspective of life extension if we were to look at it from the animal data. From human data it's very early to say but I've been actually positively surprised by rapamycin over the last few years. In the past I might have been skeptical about it that, you know, okay, it inhibits mTOR, it might be bad for muscle maintenance, it might be bad for preserving brain cells because you need mTOR as well for growing brain cells neurogenesis. But there have been a few studies on humans over the last few years that show that rapamycin not only didn't result in muscle loss but actually helped to preserve muscle as, in older people. So that's quite interesting, I would say, that this, would really increase potential for rapamycin for being an otherwise healthy, like a longevity pharmaceutical, especially for elderly people, so yeah. With limited evidence I'm gonna put it in the God Tier but based on the, animal data it definitely belongs in the God Tier. From a life extension perspective solely. Metformin, so this is pretty much paired with rapamycin always. And similar reason, it's a very popular antiaging drug or people take it for antiaging purposes. But, you know, there is much better alternatives to metformin such as SGLT1 inhibitors that haven't seem to extend lifespan in animals and appear to have much fewer side effects than Metformin. So Metformin obviously is very cheap, it's easy to find, so it has obviously some potential and definitely is beneficial for diabetics or people with insulin resistance. But, it also has a few more side effects compared to like some of these other SGLT1 inhibitors. And metformin use in some studies is seem to be associated with longevity, but those studies tend to be, a bit poorly done. And if you just look at, yeah, what what happens to people who don't have diabetes, what if they take matoran, then, it doesn't extend their lifespan. It's not associated with increased longevity in those individuals either. So I'm gonna put it in the okay tier from the perspective of longevity and lifespan because the animal data also isn't that consistent with metformin. Calcium alpha keyoglutarate. So this one, has been seen to extend most lifespan. It, has limited data in humans, so there is not a lot of clinical trials on humans. One of the few clinical trials on humans looked at epigenetic age and calcium alpha ketoglutarate did reduce DNA methylation age in humans, so you know, that could be a sign in a positive direction, so you have two, I guess, indications that it has some potential. Firstly the mouse life extension and in humans reduction in biological age, but I wouldn't associate a reduction in biological age in humans with greater life extension or greater longevity. We don't have that kind of data to claim that. But I would put it in the okay tier because of that same reason. Yes, it possibly has life extension effects in animals. It has been seen to do so in humans, you know, because it doesn't have any other clinical data really. There's no there's very limited evidence about it helping with wound healing or bone density but it doesn't have some other metabolic health benefits compared to something like taurine. Melatonin, so melatonin, I would put it in the good tier based on the longevity and anti aging perspective. And the reason for that is because we just don't have that much data about even animal data for longevity or life extension. In humans it again improves many aspects of metabolic health such as lowering insulin resistance, lowering inflammation, lowering lipids in higher doses and improving sleep. So it's definitely very worthwhile for most people. With With age you see a decline in melatonin so elderly people will definitely benefit from melatonin and it, you know, improves aspects of metabolic health as well. So I'll put it in the good tier and it's not in the gut tier because of the somewhat limited data for life extension from animal studies. Sert6. So Sert6 is the only sirtuin seen to extend lifespan and, it, you know, doesn't really have that much other evidence, unfortunately. It is possible to buy it as a supplement but there's no really no other clinical trials on SIRT6, unfortunately. And, you know, the only evidence we could use is that it might extend lifespan or it has been seen to extend lifespan in mice. Although it's not that well studied compared to something like rapamycin for example. So I'll put it in the okay tier. It doesn't appear to have side effects or any significant side effects. We'll put it in the okay tier for that reason. NAC, so NAC, especially combined with glycines or the glynaq combo has been seen to extend lifespan in mice and in humans. It's also been seen to improve certain functional outcomes, grip strength, walking speed, cognition, body composition, metabolic health markers etcetera. Then it also has inflammatory effects. So I would, in my opinion, it is guttier based on the combination of those factors. So animal data plus human data from clinical trials. So it's much well more studied than melatonin or SIRT6 in the context of longevity. NMN, so, NAD booster doesn't appear to have side effects so it's not gonna be in the bad tier. It's not really miraculous either. Unfortunately, you know, a few years ago many people would have had the impression that it is a next miraculous molecule but unfortunately the clinical trials out there right now suggest that it does something but it's not really significant. You know, that something mostly is a slight improvement in incidence activity, reduction in inflammation, maybe some improvements in physical function as well. And, in animals it has I have seen one study where it was seen to extend lifespan in mice, but nothing, or that's the only one. So I'll put it in the okay tier based on that. So again, any longevity stack would have some aspect of of NAD support. So, Apigenin for reducing CD38. Which results in greater NAD recycling and production. And some NAD boosters such as NMN, NR or niacinamide. I'll put them all here, in the same bucket in my eyes that they do have some benefits, they all raise energy, so it doesn't really matter which one you take. And some longevity stack would have some component of energy metabolism. Either one of these three or and an additional, CD38 inhibitor. Niacin is also an NAD, supports NAD production. It also has the additional benefit of increasing HDL cholesterol, but unfortunately, raising HDL cholesterol doesn't reduce the risk of heart disease. It's been seen, already several decades ago that although you see increase in HDL from NASHIN it doesn't really reduce heart disease events. So again, I'll put it in the okay tier for that reason. It's in the same bucket as other energy boosters for me. Next up, quercetin, so this is a senolytic that will help with senescent cells. There is some potential life extension effects as well from animal studies. In human studies, much more limited evidence. Yeah, some of the senolytic clinical trials will be coming out in the near future, so we'll see what comes from that. But other than that I would say, all the senolytics like quercetin and fisetin, they're okay. So they do work in terms of inhibiting senescent cells but based on the human data we can't really say much about their effectiveness. They do reduce senescent cells in humans as well, but what is the actual outcome of that? Based on the information right now I really can't say. And another issue with the senolytics is that you don't always want to inhibit the senescent cells because senescent cells are also involved in wound healing. They have other benefits so you don't always want to eliminate your senescent cells. Especially if you're younger, possibly. And elderly people also need wound healing obviously. So, we don't have the exact protocol, what's the best protocol to use these senolytics. How much? What's the dose? How frequently? You know, a lot of companies market that okay, take it twice a month, two days a month, that's it. Well, there's no evidence that that is their protocol that would work. They just come up with their own protocol. So, you know. Yeah, I wouldn't know if that would be the best protocol. But similar to NMN and NAD boosters, a good longevity supplement stack or a pharmaceutical stack would involve some aspects of senolytics. Whether that be quercetin, dasatinib, which is the antihistamine that was combined with quercetin, seemed to be effective for life extension in animals and removing senescent cells. So I'll put all the senolytics into this okay category. Yes they work, but we don't know exactly what the protocol is. Glycine, so glycine I'll put in Haggard tier immediately. Mostly because it's an easy win. Now, glycine isn't going to extend your lifespan miraculously and even in animal studies it hasn't been seen to extend animal lifespan very significantly. But it is like a sure bet. It's a very safe compound and it's just like an easy win. So it's obviously much less effective than rapamycin in terms of life extension in animal studies and even taurine. So taurine has also seemed to extend lifespan in mice more so than glycine. So glycine gives like a small extension of lifespan in animal studies, in mouse studies. And when it comes to humans, combined with NAC it improves physical function, cognitive function, body composition and markers of metabolic health, other hallmarks of aging. So it is a very consistent consistently shown to have benefits, very safe and easy win. So that's why, again, I would always add it to someone's longevity stack for those reasons. It's an easy win, it's safe. Little to no side effects. Some people might report nausea or headaches or something like that. But in the majority of cases it's very safe. Spermidine, so as a supplement, you know there's no side effects from it. As a supplement the only effects that I've seen are slight potential improvement in cognition and potential skin health benefits. But in terms of life extension, not so much. And, spermidine is popular mostly because dietary spermidine intake is associated with reduced mortality. So if you get over eleven milligrams of spermidine a day from your diet, then that is associated with a slight reduction, if I'm not mistaken, thirty percent reduction in mortality risk. But, you know, the reason for that is because foods that have pyrimidine are healthy foods. Mushroom, vegetables, cheeses, etcetera. So, it's much better to focus on the dietary sppermidine rather than the supplemental sppermidine if we were to look at the actual evidence. So I'll put it in the okay tier for that reason that it doesn't have any negative side effects that I'm aware of and it might potentially help with cognition in elderly people, but it's somewhat limited and it might have skin antiaging benefits. Which, you know, is anti aging effect or benefit but in this video we're specifically focusing on, you know, life extension and longer life span. Omega threes. So in my opinion, omega threes are guttier because there is just so much data, so many clinical trials showing that they have benefits for reducing cardiovascular events as well as improving insulin sensitivity, lowering inflammation, helping muscle growth, helping cognition and a higher omega three index is associated also with reduced mortality and reduced alzheimer's, reduced heart disease. So, based on that I'll put it in the gut tier. There's no life extension data that I'm aware of from omega three's but the human data is very, you know, enormous. It's, I think it's equally as studied as creatine for example. In terms of the amount of studies. And speaking of creatine, so creatine again, very studied and definitely the most effective sports performance supplement out there will have benefits of muscle strength, muscle power and possibly cognition as well. But the thing with creatine is that it's not going to give you cognitive superpowers, it's not going to increase your cognition beyond the normal. It's going to make up for some deficit in cognition that could be caused by sleep loss, sleep deprivation, jet lag, head concussion, traumatic brain injury and those kind of things. So it obviously has very useful effects and definitely for sports performance but I wouldn't consider it longevity supplement for that reason. I would, you know I guess it's still better than some of these other supplements here. It has definitely a lot more evidence. It's not going to have like an actual life extension effect but it supports health span, I guess, so that your physical health will be better for longer and possibly also cognitive health will be better for longer. But there are still bean So this is a cousin molecule for resveratrol. There's no data that it would extend lifespan in animals and the only human trials that I've seen is that it actually raises LDL and might lower blood pressure. So I'll put it in the back tier because there's just very little data about that and possibly negative side effects in terms of lipid profile. Magnesium, so I think magnesium, I'll put it in the good tier just from the perspective of longevity and life extension. Most people would benefit from some aspects of magnesium supplementation but there's no direct evidence that it would just extend lifespan in animals or that it would significantly reduce future risk of chronic diseases. It's more effective if you're deficient in magnesium. So if you're deficient in magnesium, it's going to help you with sleep, stress, blood sugar regulation, blood pressure etcetera. But if you're otherwise healthy, then adding extra magnesium is not going to have a significant effect, it's going to, you know, the only side effect you could get from magnesium is like diarrhea. So, I would otherwise consider it like an actual longevity of lifespan supplement. But you know it's still something that most people could benefit from. Vitamin k2. So vitamin k2, I'll put it also in the good tier. So, has a you could also just categorize k one here as well. I would use them together. K one has evidence for bone density and even reduced atherosclerosis and k2 also seen to reduce atherosclerosis as well as increased bone density. So they're both pretty good. Sulfurofen has been seen to extend lifespan in some animal models like roundworms but it's significantly less researched than rapamycin or glycine or taurine or NAC and the human evidence is also a lot more limited. So I'll, you know, I wouldn't put it in the good tier because of the limited evidence, so I'll put it in the okay, tier. So it works through increasing the glutathione levels, which is a powerful antioxidant and, in a lot of cases people need additional antioxidant support, but, not always. And what's the specific dose or specific protocol to be used that is still to be established in my opinion. Curcumin has also been seen to extend lifespan in a few animal models In human studies the most consistent effect is lower inflammation, so lower CRP, but also better lipid and metabolic health profile in clinical trials. There's quite a lot of them so I would, you know, put it in the gut here based on those criteria or those conditions. So it improves metabolic health and otherwise inflammatory status in humans and in animal studies. It also extends lifespan. Methylated B vitamins. So methylated B vitamins can be very effective for people who have poor methylation. So for them it can be guttier in terms of that. It helps to lower homocysteine and improve just overall metabolic health. But, you know, there's no real life extension data from methylated B vitamins so I'll put them in the okay tier. So glutathione, you know, I mentioned earlier that glycine and NAC have been seen to extend lifespan in mice and all these several clinical trials on humans are showing improved physical function and over metabolic health etc. So based on and you know it works through increasing gluathion, NSC and glycine being precursors to gluathion. So you know based on that, gluathion will also be guttier because you just take the direct compound. But the issue is that, it's actually much better to take the precursors rather than their main compound itself. And there is some evidence that, taking glucosan alone or directly might have some negative side effects. So excess anti oxidant status or excess anti oxidants can surely be harmful as well in certain aspects. So I wouldn't put it in the god tier because of that so it's better to take the precursors and based on the evidence than these precursors have shown to provide more consistent benefits in animal studies as well as in human studies. But I'll put it in the, good tier based on that reason. It's better to take the precursors so your body would, it has a better control or handle over its own antioxidant defense system rather than just taking the main compound itself in larger quantities. It's better to give the precursors so your body regulates the glutathione levels based on the requirement. Lithium orotate. So recently lithium has become even more popular for neurodegeneration and there was a recent study that implicated lithium deficiency deficiency in neurodegeneration. And there's this interesting data that, regions with higher lithium in the drinking water have lower rates of suicide, lower rates of homicide and greater longevity. So there might be something there. It's obviously very rough data, these drinking water data with lithium but there's some of these clinical trials as well on people with bipolar disorder where individuals taking lithium have lower rates of future dementia. And there is some animal data as well that lithium extends lifespan, so I'll put it in the good tier. Lutein and zeaxanthin, so carotenoids, and they have been seen to extend lifespan in animal studies, a few of them. Animal models, mostly some fruit flies. But in humans it supports vision, possibly cognition and possibly skin health as well, so put it in the good tier. So I think that these combinations, they're usually taken together, lutein and zeaxanthin for eye health, is not only good for your eyes but possibly for other functions as well. Vitamin C. So, vitamin C is a very safe compound and obviously an important one. Essential vitamin, it's always talked about in the context of collagen synthesis. We have evidence of vitamin c extending animal lifespan is somewhat conflicted. And in human randomized controlled trials there is some association with antioxidant supplements and increased mortality, but vitamin c was not one of them. So it was vitamin A, beta carotene that were to have increased association with mortality but vitamin C was not one of them so it's safe. So I'll put it in the okay tier. You know, Is Vitamin C something that you can just take thousands of milligrams a day and nothing would happen pretty much? You might see something of it. People who have, let's say, lower Vitamin C intake, they might notice some additional benefits. But even if you take a thousand milligrams of C every day, you're just at that point you're just wasting it, essentially. Ergotthanin. So, this is a molecule that has become also quite popular recently or is slowly becoming popular. And there is some evidence that it might help with brain aging and brain health. But the interesting thing about ergothanin is that the doses seem to provide those effects for the brain and cognition are pretty low. You can easily get that from diet. So I don't really see a reason why you would ever supplement ergothione when you could get three to five times more ergothione from eating a regular diet. Eating things like mushrooms, vegetables, etcetera, they contain you you get you get all the ergothione you would want from those foods. So, you know, I don't see really see any reason to supplement ergothione as long as you eat a pretty, diverse and a healthy diet. But it's not gonna hurt you either based on the evidence. Methylene blue, so this is, again not the supplement, but you know, people really people who are into supplements also take methylene blue quite often, so I'll just mention it here. And there's no data that methylene blue would extend lifespan in animals. The human data is more about specific medical conditions and it's mostly theoretical. So there's really no evidence that you get to go with when we're talking about methylene blue. A lot of people swear by it, that it helps them and obviously it has a useful role in situations of mitochondrial dysfunction, such as cyanide poisoning, possibly neurodegeneration, some severe metabolic disorders, etc. So it can be like a clutch supplement health span or lifespan to an otherwise healthy individual in my opinion. It could possibly be bad for some individuals who are otherwise healthy. And I wouldn't say that it's something that you just want to take recreationally if you are otherwise healthy. So put it in the bad tier based on that because it has some use case similar to Resveratrol, it has some use case but for most people I wouldn't really think that it is worthwhile. Multivitamin is okay because, you're just covering your daily vitamins and minerals to a certain extent. It's better to take a multivitamin than to be completely deficient in, certain vitamins and minerals if you're not getting them from your diet, obviously. And, you know, there are some randomized control trials on elderly people as well that it improves cognition, but mostly through increasing the nutrient intake. And with multivitamins, they don't really reduce the risk of mortality or future risk of these chronic diseases. So they're benign in my opinion. In most cases the multivitamin is just going to be like a safe bet that you cover your daily nutrients, but chances are you're already getting it. You're already getting your daily nutrients. So garlic extract, I'll put it in the good tier because, there's quite a lot of clinical trials on things like blood pressure, lipids, blood sugar, waist circumference etcetera. So it improves metabolic health across the board, improves lipid panel, improves cardiovascular disease risk factors. It has a ton of clinical evidence for that. Yeah, but it doesn't have that much life extension data from animal studies. So because of that I'll put it in the good tier. It's not going to like probably extend your life, but it, could possibly reduce the risk factors of, some of these chronic diseases that could shorten your life. If that makes sense. Astaxanthin, I'll put it in the gut tier. So, also recently seen to extend lifespan or it's been seen to do that before, but recently was seen to do that again. And Azaxanthin in my opinion is also otherwise safe and in human studies, human clinical trials, it appears to lower inflammation. It also has possible benefits on blood pressure and lipids, plus skin and aging benefits. Now obviously this is not the topic of this video but it's just an additional bonus. So life extension in animals plus, it's a senolytic, so it has potential senolytic effects, anti inflammatory effects, lipid effects, blood pressure effects, so the combination of all these factors. TMG, so trimethylglycine supports homocysteine. I'll put it in the okay tier. It doesn't have any life extension data from animal studies and obviously not humans as well, but in humans it can lower homocysteine levels. Maybe it improves exercise performance and body composition but that's a bit more limited, a little more tricky. But it does certainly help with homocysteine so, a lot of people benefit from TMG but it's not a significant powerhouse in, longevity and lifespan specifically. I do take TMG myself because I have genetically slightly higher homocysteine levels. But, yeah. Similar to, methylated b vitamins, it's kinda useful for homocysteine. Ginger, so it has been seen to extend lifespan in animals and in humans. It improves inflammation, might support weight loss as well and joint health, but it has slightly less evidence as curcumin, so I'll put it in the GU tier. But otherwise ginger is quite a good compound when speaking of general longevity. CoQ10, so CoQ10 has some evidence in animal studies that it helps with lifespan and longevity, but in humans it only appears to work for heart failure, improving energy in like, people who have energy issues or chronic fatigue. But, yeah, it is significantly less researched as some of these gut tier supplements. So it's not gonna be a gut tier supplement. So I'll put it in, I'll put it in the good tier, the tail end of good tier. Pqq, is similar to CoQ10. It supports mitochondrial function, it's an antioxidant, but it has a lot less evidence than CoQ10. Some people say that PQQ is more potent than CoQ10, which could be the case, but PQQ is just less researched compared to CoQ10. So it can't be on the equal level based on that. So, I'll put it in the okay tier mostly because of the limited human trials. Chondroitin sulfate, so this is a sulfur compound mostly in the context of joint health. Out of all these joint supplements, chondroitin is the worst. It has the least evidence. It might have some skin benefits, has some joint benefits but it's the least effective for that and has the least evidence for life span span as well. Put in the okay tier, MSM as well. MSM has better skin health benefits and I want to even actually consider the best benefit of MSM being skin health, based on the evidences I've seen. So it's not nearly as good for joint health either, but it's good for skin. But it doesn't have that much evidence for life extension. In the previous video I put it into the good tier. But that's because I'm mostly impressed by the skin benefits from MSM rather than the potential life extension benefits. So in this video it's gonna be okay tier because there are limited lifespan and longevity benefits. But for skin health it's good in my opinion. Luchosamine on the other hand will be in the good tier as was in the same in the other video because, yes it has joint benefits but Glucosamine use is also associated with reduced mortality and reduced heart disease in humans. So that's why it's gonna be in good tier. Clercosamine also increases autophagy and in animal studies it has been seen to have some longevity benefits. So I'll put it in the good tier based on that. Again, I made this list based on the effects on lifespan and longevity specifically. So, not skin benefits, not some exercise benefits. Mostly for, let's say, health span, which would also extend your lifespan. So right, if you stay healthier for longer you have better physical and mental performance for longer in your life, you will also live a bit longer. So the combination of those factors. Raw animal lifespan data plus healthspan data in humans. Healthspan being better physical and cognitive performance and a reduction in the risk of various chronic diseases. So here's the list. Based on that, obviously it's gonna be slightly different different than the total a 100, most popular supplement list that I made previously. And the reason for that is because, yeah, in that video I ranked things based on the overall data. So everything that is about this supplement, what But in this video I'm gonna just look at raw animal lifespan data plus the human health span data because that's the only thing we can take from human studies. So yeah, the list, the gut tier supplements, you know, taurine, rapamycin, nac, glycine, omega-three, curcumin, azaxanthin. Everything here except rapamycin was in the gut tier from the previous video as well. So again, these supplements I would consider one of the best supplements out there. Good tier. A few of these supplements were in the gut tier in the previous video, such as melatonin and lutein. So, magnesium as well was in the gut tier with some of them. So it doesn't mean that they're bad, it's just that in the context of lifespan specifically they're less effective as these gut tier supplements. You know, creatine is a gut tier supplement for sports and other things, but the evidence for lifespan and longevity is much more limited. And okay tier supplements, these supplements again are not bad. They have a lot of some effects and as I said earlier, NAD boosters would be part of a stack. Would be part of some longevity stack. The same with, vitamin c and apigenin and TMG or Metrolabe B vitamins. Most people will have it in their stack, but they're not having specific lifespan, effects. And yeah, we actually didn't get any junk tier supplements here because none of these supplements actually shorten your lifespan. If that makes sense? Alright, that's it for this video. Make sure to check out the full video where I rank a 100 supplements from worst to best. The overall impression of these supplements and their overall effects across all aspects.