The question I try to answer in this video is what's the best way to do intermittent fasting in 2025? Over the last few years, intermittent fasting has gained a lot of attention from scientists and celebrities as a way to lose weight and improve health. There have been several studies published over the last few years that help to answer the question, what's the best eating window? Should you skip breakfast or should you skip dinner? And much more, which I'm gonna cover in this video. First, I'll lay the groundwork what's proven to work with intermittent fasting. Intermittent fasting does help with weight loss and improves metabolic health and cardiometabolic risk factors, such as blood sugar, triglycerides, waist circumference, and inflammation. There are several meta analysis of clinical trials showing those effects that compile dozens of studies. We also know by now that most of those benefits come from the calorie restriction. I know a lot of intermittent fasting enthusiasts will say that no, it's because of being in a smaller eating window. However, several controlled feeding trials that feed people the exact same amount of calories, the only difference being how big their eating window is, find that intermittent fasting is effective for weight loss, but it's not superior to regular calorie restriction. Basically, you would lose the same amount of weight eating six meals a day versus one meal a day if the calories and macros were exactly the same. The reason why people who do intermittent fasting say often that they lose more weight doing that is because if they are confining their eating window, then they automatically eat less calories. They're more satiated and they're more full, which automatically results in them eating less food. There's one great randomness control trial from 2024 that control for calories and macronutrient ratios, which helps to standardize the effects of diet on weight loss. The people were divided into either a ten hour eating window with 80% of their calories being eaten before 1PM or a usual eating pattern where they ate within sixteen hours and over 50% of their calories after 5PM. So that's quite late. By the end of twelve weeks, both groups lost weight, but there is no significant difference between weight loss or blood sugar levels between the groups. So it doesn't matter if you eat six meals a day or you eat one meal a day, if the calories are the same, you'll lose the same amount of weight. Now there's of course some nuances and exceptions to this, but as a general rule, that's the truth. But there are some interesting studies comparing the effects of earlier time restricted eating and late time restricted eating that might have some differences. This is like another debate inside the innovative fasting community. Should you skip dinner or should you sleep breakfast? Well, a 2023 meta analysis of eight clinical trials found that early time restricted eating is generally more effective for weight loss than late time restricted eating when combined with calorie restriction. It's even found that regular calorie restriction without intermittent fasting provides greater weight loss when the majority of calories are consumed earlier in the day. I personally think that those results are because if you skip dinner, then you're less likely to have, like, these late night snacks. If you control your eating window, you block your eating window, let's let's say 5PM, then you're less likely to go to the fridge before bed and take some snacks. However, another 2023 meta analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials found that there were no differences in weight loss between early and late time restricted eating. However, early time restricted eating appeared to be better for improving insulin resistance. There were no differences in blood pressure, blood sugar, and blood lipids between early and late time restricted eating. This is where it gets interesting because the difference in insulin resistance and insulin sensitivity might be because of the circadian rhythms. Humans have higher insulin sensitivity and better glucose metabolism earlier in the day, and their blood sugar response to meals is better earlier than later. However, it's also the case that people doing early time restricted eating have higher healthy eating indexes, which means that people who do early time restricted eating end up making healthier food choices. So for metabolic health, it might be that earlier time restricted eating where you eat majority of your calories earlier in the day and you have an earlier dinner, that can be better for metabolic health, especially insulin sensitivity. However, if you're controlling all for the calories, you're controlling for the exercise, and all the food choices are the same, and you're not particularly overweight, and you're not particularly insulin resistant, then based on the clinical trials, then there doesn't appear to be any significant difference between eating early versus late as as long as you're not eating, like, immediately before bed. So these are some of the major studies that have been published over the last two years that have at least helped me understand intermittent fasting a lot better, and they've made me adjust my eating window slightly as well. So here are some of the most important takeaways for how you can structure your intermittent fasting window. If you're not controlling for calorie intake, you're not counting and weighing your food, then intermittent fasting and time restricted eating tends to result in greater weight loss in free living people than not controlling for eating window because people subconsciously start eating fewer calories. Early time restricted eating tends to result in better weight loss and better blood sugar markers than late time restricted eating if you're not controlling for the calories because people who eat early tend to make healthier food choices and they tend to stop snacking earlier in a day. So that creates a bigger calorie deficit if you're not counting the calories. However, if you count for all the calories, you control the calorie intake, you control even the macros, then there's no difference between early and late time residual eating for at least weight loss and other blood markers. Maybe there will be some differences in insulin sensitivity. People who eat earlier in the day and they stop eating earlier tend to have better insulin sensitivity because of the circadian rhythms, but it might be a very small difference if you're not insulin resistant. If you're controlling for all your calories, you eat the same amount of calories and macros on any diet, then there's no difference in weight loss and blood sugar levels between doing some form of time restricted eating and having a regular eating window of breakfast, lunch, dinner, and some snacks. That's been demonstrated to be true for a long time, and there's no refuting it at this point. So what you should do is make your decision based on your lifestyle and dietary preference. If you have a family or you like to go out for dinners with friends, then maybe skip breakfast and do late time restricted eating. That's what people in the Mediterranean countries do. They eat very late, and they don't usually have breakfast, and it seems to be working out fine for them. If you like the benefits of early time restricted eating in terms of better sleep, circadian alignment, and lower blood sugar, then start your eating window earlier in the day and have an early dinner. I don't think you need to stop eating at, like, 1PM or even 3PM. I personally stop eating at 4PM. I have my dinner at 4PM, so I finish it at, like, 5PM, and that has improved my sleep quality quite a lot, and it just feels quite nice to be sleeping on a slightly emptier stomach. Just don't backload all of your calories immediately before bed. There are just a few key points you have to keep in mind whenever doing intermittent fasting to gain the health benefits. Don't overeat calories. If you don't want to gain weight, then eating excess calories will make you gain weight. Doesn't matter if you eat in one meal or six meals. Make sure you get your protein target of 1.6 grams per kilogram or 0.8 grams per pound to maintain muscle tissue. Don't eat immediately before bed. Have at least four hours of no eating before bed for optimal sleep. What types of food matter, not only when you eat them? Check out my video about my evidence based longevity diet next. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.