If you look at the standard distribution of the population, then most people on average are going to be in the middle, which represents average health. Then on the right side, you have top 10%, top 5%, and top 1% of the healthiest individuals. On the left side, you have the unhealthiest individuals. Also, the bottom top one, top five, and top 10%. I'll share what does top 1% health look like. I'll give you a plan and how do you achieve it. Time stamps below. Let's start with fitness markers because physical fitness is the cornerstone to physical health. If you're fifty kilograms overweight and you get winded walking upstairs, you're not in good health by definition. Fitness can be categorized mostly as muscle strength and power and cardiorespiratory fitness. Both higher VO two max and higher muscle strength are associated with reduced risk of mortality, and they're one of the biggest predictors of longevity. The average person's VO two max is high thirties or low forties, which isn't very high, and it will decrease with age. For top 1% of health, you want your VO two max to be above 55 as a man and above 50 as a woman. These numbers will decline with age. So the top 1% of vo two max for a 60 year old would be above 44 for men and above 40 for women. The gold standard test for measuring muscle strength is the grip strength dynamometer but not everyone has access to it. You can also measure your muscle strength by doing pull ups and push ups. Pull ups and push ups are a good exercise because to get good at them, you also need to maintain a lower body fat and body weight. So you're not only measuring your strength, but also assessing your body composition indirectly. For men, top 1% of pull ups is over 20 and over three for women. If you're older than 60, then top 1% is six pull ups for men and over one pull up for women. I'll also share my own markers to back up my claim of being in top 1% of health. I can do over 30 pull ups and just last week I did 33 strict pull ups. My best VO2 max result has been 66 but it's around 60 right now because I'm doing less cardio. When it comes to VO2 max then it's a slightly better marker than muscle strength because you could have very high muscle strength but still be overweight like a powerlifter. Whereas to have a high v two max, you also need to have less body fat and to be generally healthier. So let's talk about body composition because if you're overweight, then by definition, you're not healthy. An average male's body fat percentage is around 25% and the average female's is 35%. That already looks quite chubby and with visible love handles. A healthy body fat percentage for men is below 15%, but for top 1% of health, it would be around eight to 12%. Now being too lean isn't healthy but being on the leaner side is better for overall health. A healthy body fat percentage for women is around 25%, but the top 1% of health would be around 18 to 22%. Body fat percentage appears to matter a lot more for men than it does for women. If a man is overweight, they're going to get diabetes, heart disease, and they're gonna die sooner than women do. So as a man, you need to be leaner, whereas for women, they can be slightly more overweight. But visceral fat that stores around the organs is a much bigger concern than the body fat under your skin, although both matter. The gold standard for measuring visceral fat is the DEXA scan or MRI, but you can assess it by measuring your waist circumference. But it's not only your waist circumference that matters. Some people might have a higher waist circumference because of being taller. The ratio between your waist circumference and your hip circumference can be more accurate for that reason. You first measure your waist circumference and then your hip circumference. Divide your waist number with your hip number. Your waist should always be smaller than your hips. For men, top 1% of health is a waist to hip ratio of less than 0.9, and for women, less than 0.8. Alright. Now let's get to the blood markers because these are crucial aspects of health. They reflect your inner health. A big part of health is the absence of disease, and disease meets a certain criteria of biomarkers that drive the progression of disease and increase the risk of getting the disease in the first place. I'm not going to go into all of the hundreds of biomarkers that you could measure because we don't have time for that. Check out my school community below for all the details for that. Some of the most insightful umbrella biomarkers of overall health are HSCRP, homocysteine, HOMA IR, hemoglobin A1 c, insulin, triglycerides, HDL cholesterol, Apo b, LDL cholesterol, omega three index, vitamin d, albumin, cystatin c, eGFR, ALT, AST, ALP, and GED. HSCRP and homocysteine are inflammatory markers. HOMA IR, hemoglobin A1C, insulin triglycerides, and HDL cholesterol reflect your insulin sensitivity and metabolic health. Apo b and LDL reflect cardiovascular disease risk. Omega three index reflects the amount of omega three fats in your red blood cells and is strongly associated with heart disease, Alzheimer's, and all cause mortality. Albumin, cystatin c, and eGFR reflect kidney function. ALT, AST, ALP, and GGT are liver markers. Generally speaking, you want lower inflammation, lower homocysteine, lower insulin, lower hemoglobin, lower triglycerides, higher HDL, lower APOB, and lower cholesterol, higher omega three index, higher albumin, lower cystatin c, higher eGFR, and lower liver enzymes. Now realistically, you're not going to be in top 1% of health with all the biomarkers in the world. You'll have some that are in top 1%, some in top two, top five, top 10%. What matters more is the overall pattern, and you can't micromanage it completely. If you do want to learn all the optimal biomarkers, then check out my school community below. My own last comprehensive blood marker test show that everything was optimal, and based on my own thorough research, they're in the range for the lowest all cause mortality risk. Alright. So how do you achieve this top 1% of health as I shared? There are a lot of specifics in terms of diet, supplements, exercise, etcetera, but the majority of benefits can be boiled down to two things, regular exercise and having a leaner body composition. Exercise is the most potent lifestyle intervention for improving all organ function, improving metabolic health, fitness, and body composition. It's one activity that pretty much targets the most areas of health, including mental health and cognition. There isn't a specific amount of exercise you need to reach top 1% of health. You just need to exercise in some amount, and some people will achieve the results faster and with less exercise than others. Generally speaking, to reach top 1% of health, you want to do resistance training at least two to three times a week for thirty to forty five minutes each session. You want to walk about 8,000 to 10,000 steps a day, and you want to do some cardiovascular exercise once a week, whether that be high intensity interval training or low intensity aerobic cardio. The key to increasing your VO2 max and strength as well as body composition is progressive overload, getting better over time. If you keep repeating the same workouts without trying to get better, you're going to stay the same. Your exercise results are going to be greatly influenced by your diet, your sleep, your relationships, and your supplements. Even genetics will influence it a lot. When we're speaking about diet, then for general health, you want to keep your body fat percentage around 10% as a man and around 20% as a female. To achieve that, you adjust your diet accordingly. Get 1.6 grams per kilogram or 0.73 grams per pound of protein a day from fatty fish, eggs, dairy, leaner meats, beans, lentils, etcetera. Adjust your fat and carbohydrate intake according to your body fat and blood work. If you want to follow the evidence and be safe, then follow something along the lines of a Mediterranean diet. The bigger influence on your blood work comes from your body fat percentage, not the actual foods that you eat. Yes. Foods matter. And to really micromanage your blood work, you will have to micromanage your diet as well to a certain extent. But the vast majority of benefits come from being leaner and not overconsuming calories. Here are some small adjustments you can make to tweak the details of your blood work. Increase fiber and reduce saturated fat to improve your lipids. Adjust carbohydrate and fat intake for improving insulin sensitivity. Both low carb and high carb diets can work in improving your glucose levels. Reduce alcohol and sugar intake for improving liver markers. Adjust protein, salt, and water for improving kidney markers. Reduce allergens and food sensitivities to reduce inflammatory markers. Then on top of that, make sure you sleep at least seven hours a night. There are also a few supplements that can improve certain aspects of your blood work and fitness. Taurine has been seen to improve lipids, blood sugar, and vo two max. Berberine has been seen to improve lipids and blood sugar. Omega threes have been seen to improve the omega three index, inflammation, blood sugar, and lipids. Glycine and NAC have been seen to improve inflammation, liver health, and blood sugar. Aged garlic extract has been seen to improve inflammation, lipids, and blood sugar. Magnesium has been seen to improve stress, sleep, and inflammation. You don't need to take all of the supplements especially if your lifestyle and diet is on point. But a few supplements can move the needle slightly. I've been researching this for over ten years, and I've made a lot of mistakes and learned a lot of lessons along the way. Check out my video about the biggest lessons I've learned next to avoid my mistakes.