I've been using red light therapy for over seven years and I'm going to share with you my experience doing it. I've used regular red light panels, smaller handheld red light devices, red light masks, red light beds, red light flexible belts, red light light bulbs, and even red light devices you put into your pants and shoot at your testicles. Here are the biggest things I've noticed. Red light therapy improves my skin texture and pigmentation. It also makes my skin a bit nice and blush. Shining gray light onto my back and joints helps with soreness and muscle pain. In the dark winter months, gray light significantly improves my mood and energy levels. And my eyes get less tired and worn out when I'm using the computer all day. Overall, I think in the modern world we're exposed to too much artificial blue light that can damage our sleep, our eyes, and overall health. Which is why I've been sticking with red light for over seven years. In the rest of this video, I'm going to go through each of these experiences and discuss the science behind them. Timestamps below. Let's start with the skin. You might think that red light therapy is a gimmick for skin antiaging. But there's actually quite a lot of clinical trials showing benefits. A 2014 randomized controlled trial saw that 30 sessions of red light therapy at six eleven to six fifty nanometers of light improved skin roughness, collagen density, and decreased wrinkle depth by 69 to 75% compared to controls. In a 2023 clinical trial, a 137 healthy volunteers saw a 30% reduction in wrinkle volume after just four weeks. What's interesting is that they did a split face experiment, which means that only one side of the face was receiving the red and amber light treatment. Exposure to red and infrared light stimulates the production of collagen and elastin. That's because red and infrared light are able to penetrate much deeper into the skin than blue or green light. Red and infrared light also stimulates the production of elastin that maintains skin elasticity. I've been using regular therapy for so long and I started when I was only 23 years old. So I can't say if it's on my example reduced or slowed down the development of wrinkles in my case. But there is clinical evidence that red light around 600 to six fifty nanometers does improve skin wrinkles by stimulating collagen synthesis. I typically use red light therapy in the morning for a nice glow up for the day for about ten minutes. I stay roughly twenty to 30 centimeters away from the device and in most cases I don't wear a shirt. Another reason I like red light therapy is because it supports energy production. Red light and near infrared light stimulates cytochrome c oxidase in the complex four of the mitochondrial electron transport chain which promotes ATP synthesis. This low level hormesis or positive stress has many systemic benefits on the skin, blood circulation, collagen synthesis, tissue regeneration and energy production. That's why I don't do radar therapy immediately before bed because it can actually wire you up a little bit and give you a small energy boost which I don't want in the evening. But it's perfect to do in the morning and the red light wavelengths mimic the sunrise a little bit. This red light is also beneficial for the eyes because the eyes consume a lot of energy and they have a lot of mitochondria for energy production. Several randomized controlled trials have shown that daily low level red light therapy slows down myopia progression, reverses myopia progression, lowers the incidence of myopia compared to controls, and has no adverse side effects, and it's non invasive. The protocol used for treating myopia in these studies is 650 nanometers of light, three minutes twice a day four hours apart, and seven days a week. Now you don't want to look directly into the light because the brightness, the intensity can be harmful to your eyes, but over the long term indirect exposure so it glances at your eyes from an angle, this red light reaching your eyes has benefits on your sleep, your circadian rhythms, and your eye health. Another thing I noticed is that using red light therapy is great for some muscle soreness or mild pain. Whenever I'm sore from lifting heavy weights, I use red light on that particular muscle region and it feels a lot better. The muscle warms up because of the increased blood flow from the red light and it also lowers inflammation. In a 2022 study, radar therapy was seen to lower soreness and exercise induced muscle damage. There was even a 2017 review of 46 studies questioning whether or not photobiomodulation with red or near infrared light should be permitted in athletic competitions because they found that photobiomodulation can increase muscle mass after training and decrease inflammation and oxidative stress in muscles. So it provides an additional advantage. I don't do full body radiotherapy every day. I mostly use it on my face and my chest. But whenever I do feel particularly sore I shine the red light on that particular muscle for about ten to fifteen minutes and it gets a lot better. Alright let me break down the different devices that I've used and what's my experience with them. The red light panels are the most versatile and useful. They're big and you can just sit in front of them. I use them the most for my daily skin and eyesight benefits. The small handheld devices are convenient for traveling and you can use them on the go. They're just with less power. The red light face masks are also great and they're more directed for the facial skin. The red light masks are probably more effective for the face than the full panels because they're literally on top of the skin. But the big panels are stronger so the distance is made up for with a greater intensity of light. The red light blanket is also quite nice as you can get full body photo via modulation. I haven't tried it that much because it's a bit less convenient to set up and you have to lay there for about fifteen to twenty minutes. I've also used the flex beam which is like a red light belt you can wrap around your back, knees, shoulders or elbows. It's the best and most convenient for these kind of edgy body shapes and it works great for muscle soreness. I also use kind of a similar device four years ago that you put into your pants, in your underpants and you shine red light on your testicles. The benefit of that is that red light might support sperm production and testosterone levels through the testicles. For the circadian rhythm regulation and sleep, I do use Raylight light bulbs that have the same wavelengths of light as Raylight therapy devices. They're just not that strong in terms of the intensity of light and thus aren't going to give you the same skin or anti inflammatory benefits as the regular panels. Overall I'm a big fan of Radial therapy which is why I've been using it for over seven years. I feel that it's working, I feel that it has benefits on my skin and it just feels good to sit in front of especially in the dark winter months. I didn't use it that much during the summer but I use it every day in the winter. Radialytherapy works great in isolation but there are also some cool techniques and products you can use to enhance its skin antiaging effects. Check out this video where I break down a five step protocol for supercharging the skin benefits of radialytherapy.