I used this small device here to measure my nighttime erections. My best score was two hundred and fifteen minutes or three hours and thirty five minutes, and on most nights I got over three hours. To my knowledge, this is the longest nighttime erection score that I've seen using this device, and I'm not taking any Viagra, Cialis or anything like that to enhance nighttime erections. Brian Johnson has said his score is a hundred and eighty two minutes or three hours and two minutes and his 19 year old son's score is a hundred and eighty four minutes or three hours and four minutes. Now three hours is already very good and healthy. I'm not trying to turn it into a competition, but I do wanna make this video to discuss the importance of nighttime erections and how you can improve your erectile health, which is actually quite underrated when it comes to cardiovascular health and overall longevity. That's because there are studies showing a relationship between poor nighttime erections with things like cardiovascular disease similar to erectile dysfunction, which is associated with diabetes and heart disease. It's normal for your body to have several erections throughout the night, usually around five to six, but you just don't remember them because you're sleeping and you obviously can measure it without using a device like this that you would put around your penis like a Oura ring. However, if you don't get that many erections or they're short, then that can be a sign of cardiovascular problems, poor blood flow, high blood pressure or aging. So how can you improve your oral nighttime erections and erectile quality? The foundation is obvious. Lose weight and be around 10% body fat for males. Being overweight worsens blood flow to the penis, but being too lean lowers your testosterone which also weakens erections. Exercise regularly especially cardiovascular exercise to support good blood flow and blood pressure throughout the body. Sleep seven to eight hours regularly to keep your stress and blood pressure low. I'm not gonna go into more details of these fundamentals, but here are some extra things that you might not know about. The goal is to increase blood flow through nitric oxide, which is a gas that smoothens blood vessels enabling more blood to flow. It also lowers blood pressure which reduces arterial stiffness. Cardiovascular exercise increases nitric oxide, but there are also some foods that do it. Beets and beetroot juice contain a lot of nitrates that have been seen to increase here to max and blood flow through nitric oxide. I don't drink beetroot juice regularly, but I do eat beetroot almost every day as just steamed beetroot cooked in the oven or as vinaigrette. Watermelon and other citrus fruits contain citrulline that also increases nitric oxide production in the body. I do eat watermelon and other citrus fruits quite regularly. You could also supplement citrulline directly for better workout performance. Other foods that contain nitrates and help with nitric oxide production include dark chocolate and raw cacao, pomegranate, garlic, cucumber, squash, and leafy greens. Another cool and important way to make nitric oxide is to expose your body to sunlight. UV radiation from the sun produces vitamin d in the skin but it also increases nitric oxide production. This makes moderate sun exposure vital to cardiovascular and erectile health. Now let's talk about Viagra. Viagra and Cialis work through inhibiting an enzyme called PDE five, which then results in greater blood flow. Viagra and Cialis also lower blood pressure, which reduces cardiovascular disease risk. Now I don't take Viagra or Cialis or any other PDE five inhibitors, and I'm not doing any other erection enhancing methods. Brian Johnson however does appear to take Cialis. I also start taking tadalafil. He also said he did shockwave therapy and injected botox into his penis to anti age his Johnson. Now I don't have anything against that, I do think that it probably works and if you're older person then it certainly will improve your acne quality. When it comes to viagra and cialis then I personally actually have seen studies that make me believe that actually viagra is somewhat of a longevity drug. There are studies linking viagra use with reduced rates of alzheimer's and heart disease in older men. The mechanism is thought to be the reduced blood pressure and better blood flow that worsens with age. A 2024 meta analysis of 13 studies saw that p d f five inhibitor use was associated with a twenty two percent lower rate of major adverse cardiovascular events. They also saw a thirty percent lower all cause mortality risk which is bonkers literally. The caveat here is that these results are probably seen in people who have cardiovascular problems, they have erectile dysfunction or some other issues with their blood vessels or blood flow. It's not clear if you're a healthy person microdosing Viagra or Cialis that it will kinda protect you against heart disease. Theoretically, it might because of the increased blood flow and lower blood pressure that tends to worsen with age. Even if you're a healthy person, you will have slightly worse blood pressure and worse blood flow in your eighties than in your forties or thirties. So if I were to be in my fifties or sixties, then I would probably consider microdosing viagra just for the benefits on my cardiovascular health. But right now I don't need it and I have three and a half hours of erections to prove it. Now let's talk about the things that reduce erection quality and increase the risk of erectile dysfunction. Diabetes and high blood pressure are what damage your blood vessels resulting in more plaque accumulation in the arteries and penis which worsens erection quality and duration. Obesity increases the risk of erectile dysfunction because of poor blood flow and higher blood pressure. Sleep apnea increases your risk of heart disease, obesity, and diabetes, but it also lowers nitric oxide production in your sleep because your body makes nitric oxide during breathing through the nose. If you're slightly overweight, you have a thick neck even from weightlifting, or you're snoring throughout the night, then chances are you'll have less nighttime erections because of the poor blood flow and lack of oxygen. Artificial blue light at night worsens sleep quality, lowers testosterone, and can impair erection quality. On the other hand, red light supports blood flow and vasodilation. There are even red light therapy devices for your testicles that you can put into your underpants. There are most studies showing that red light on the penis improves erections, but there are no human trials as of now. Let me give you an overview of what I do to improve my cardiovascular and erectile health. I exercise regularly and I don't skip cardio. I do at least two hours of cardiovascular exercise per week in zone two which is the aerobic zone. I stay around 10% body fat year round. If it's less than 10% then you tend to see a decrease in testosterone which would mean less erections. If you're above 12 to 13% body fat then that also tends to lower erections in my opinion because of the lack of blood flow and obesity. I eat plenty of dietary nitrates from beet root and other vegetables. My diet also includes fruit like watermelon and oranges for the citrulline. I do red light therapy every day but I don't do it on my testicles or penis, just the face and the neck. I take the sauna almost every day whether that be with the infrared sauna blanket or regular sauna. It's one of the best things for supporting blood flow and improving cardiovascular health. There are a lot of studies showing that sauna use reduces heart disease and hypertension risk. One of the mechanisms is through increased blood flow. And I have a beautiful wife which I think definitely contributes to my three and a half hour night time erections. Sleep is one of the most important factors to your overall health. Getting good sleep means you'll have better erections, you'll also have better blood markers, you'll recover faster, and you'll look better. Check out my video on how I increased my sleep score from 75 to 100 next.