You don't need to have some crazy complex routine to be healthy. In fact, I think there are actually 10 habits if you follow consistently that would get you healthier than ninety five percent of people. So I'm just going to list them here. And And, number one would be walking over 8,700 steps a day. Number two, sunlight exposure for vitamin d and circadian rhythm alignment. Number three, intentionality. Having certain goals and aspirations. Being intentional about your health, actually being aware and trying to improve your health. That's actually very underrated. Because what you give attention to and what you are intentional about, you're more likely to improve. Number four, drinking two liters of water per day. You know, surprisingly most people aren't actually drinking that much. They're drinking way less which, leads to dehydration and other problems. Number five. Relationships and friends and family time. So just taking the time to nurture your relationships. Number six. Time for relaxation, which is underrated as well. You don't need to be go go go all the time. Just relaxing is also very important. Number seven. Working out three to four times a week. So every other day or a few times a week. That's already extremely beneficial and, way more than an average person does and ideally a mix of weights and cardio. Number eight. Eat whole foods. So things you can, recognize without label and not in a packaged or processed format. So things like vegetables, meat, fish, eggs, dairy, fruits, berries, nuts, seeds, dairy, fruits, berries, nuts, etcetera. Number nine. Reduce artificial blue light in the evening. So these kind of bright lights, blue and green lights, they disrupt your circadian rhythm and, make you sleep worse. And lastly, number 10, regular bedtime and wake up times. So having a consistent circadian rhythm. These 10 habits alone will, get you healthier than ninety five percent of people, in my opinion. And the majority of people aren't meeting these habits. They're not walking that much. They're not getting enough sunlight. They don't have any intentionality about their health. They don't drink enough water. They don't, pay that much attention to their friends or family. They don't take time for relaxation. They don't work out. Maybe once or twice a week. They eat a lot of processed foods. They get bright light exposure in their face from their smartphones before bed and, they just go to bed at irregular times. They stay up past their regular bedtime. They wake up too late, etc. So these 10 habits are very important and cornerstone to any health routine. The most important thing about health isn't perfection or having extremely complicated routines. It's about consistency with the fundamentals over a long period of time. If you just stay consistent with these health habits, you're gonna become healthier than ninety five percent of people. I'm pretty sure of that.