Eat real food and exercise. Everyone that's ever used that approach has died. Right? So but there's gotta be a deeper layer. What are the biomarkers of this cachexic phenotype where you're just decaying? You're still alive, but you're basically literally dying and decaying and and decomposing over a ten or fifteen year period. Michael, welcome back to the show. Hey, Sien. Thanks for having me back. Yeah. I'm excited to have you back. And, yeah. This is our third episode or even fourth, I think. And, yeah, like, I always have you back. So because we never go into, you know, all the details that we want to talk about, so we need separate episodes for different, topics. And, yeah, this time we wanted to talk about, blood work, which I think, you know, you and I agree that is one of the most important things for your, let's say, longevity potential. So, like, if knowing which direction are you heading in, like, are you heading in a wrong direction or in in the right direction? And blood work is kind of, you know, a reflection of your, inner health as well. What is your, like, I guess, philosophy when it comes to blood markers and, how would you, like, prioritize it? Yeah. Perfect first question. So let's frame it as the, health and potentially longevity, hierarchy optimization. Right? So I see body composition. Right? So leanness, low relatively low body fat, low visceral fat, relatively high bone mineral density. But then it's not just one time point. It's avoiding age related changes. Right? So loss of lean mass, resisting age related increase for body fat and visceral fat, decline for bone mineral density. Right? That's at the top of the hierarchy. Optimizing that. Also physical fitness. Right? V o two max, grip strength. And then, you know, as a harder to measure aspect, cognitive function. Right? Because who wants to be fit and lean and then cognitively, you know right? So but that's a harder thing to measure. Right? So at the top of the pyramid is leanness and fitness. Right? But this has been the approach forever. Right? Just eat real food and exercise. And, everyone that's ever used that approach has died. Right? So I'm not saying I'm gonna be the first, to break that mold, but there's gotta be a deeper layer a deeper layer. Right? So, this is gonna be a long winded answer. I hope I hope, I don't lose anyone. You know? But, anyway, it's important to get out there. Right? So then if we look under the hood, right, then let's look at just using blood biomarkers as an example because there are things like, blood pressure, so vascular health, lung function, you know, how strong is your forced exhalation, just as one example, that are not included in blood biomarkers, but they're obvious important measures of organ and systemic health that that get worse with aging. Right? So that's also on the list. I don't want people to think, oh, it's only blood both blood biomarkers is far from the truth. Right? It's hierarchy at the top and then subdividing into all of the biomarkers of as many organ systems as possible. So with that in mind, where to start? Right? So blood would be a good representation of, without taking tissue biopsies. Right? I can't imagine any of us is gonna go in eight times a year and pull muscle or pull liver. This is just unreasonable. Right? So so then in terms of looking at a blood sample, about 45% of it is red blood cells. Right? So, obviously, looking at red blood cell markers, whether it's total red blood cells, the size of red blood cells, which is the MCV, the variation in the size of the red blood cells, which is the RDW, which I'm sure you know and maybe others may know is an important predictor of longevity at least in mice. And the data in humans matches the data in mice, which suggests it could be a marker of longevity in people too, a dramatically underrated marker of longevity. And then hemoglobin, right, which declines during aging. It's your oxygen carrying capacity. So all of those red blood cell measures would would would be basically, you know, second tier where, you know, because it's such a huge fraction of blood and a major cell type, we wanna be measuring those biomarkers. And then slightly above that are the white blood cells, right, at 1% of the total blood volume. So that doesn't mean the red blood cells are 45 times more important than white blood cells. It's just dissecting everything in blood and trying to measure the biggest trees in the forest. Right? So white blood cells. But then white blood cells can be further subdivided. They don't all move in the same directions. So neutrophils and monocytes increase during aging. Lymphocytes decrease during aging. So we wanna keep our eyes on those three because that's about 95% of total white blood cells. We wanna keep an eye on those three over time, and it isn't just one time point. It's making sure that the neutrophils and monocytes aren't increasing and the lymphocytes aren't decreasing. Alright. So now we got the cells and also platelets are in that list too. Right. So now we got the cells. We cover that in the blood. So now we've got the plasma fraction, right, where you've got proteins, metabolites, you know, and then so just starting with the proteins. Right? So we could jump straight into things like Cystatin c as a marker of kidney health or CRP, you know, inflammatory mark CRP, IL six, TNF alpha. But the way I look at this is I'm trying to go after the biggest trees in the forest. For me, it makes sense that optimizing the biggest trees would have the biggest impact long term. So what are the biggest trees in the blood forest? Right? So most of us are focused on glucose and lipids, lipoproteins. Right? But just to put it into perspective, glucose is 80 milligrams per deciliter. Albumin is 4,500 milligrams per deciliter. Right? So albumin by far in terms of concentration is way more than glucose and even lipoproteins. Right? If total cholesterol is, say, 200, 200 versus 4,500 for albumin. So albumin for sure is a big tree in the forest that is almost always ignored or underrated. Right? But then also, you've got the globulins, which can be subdivided too into IgG, which a recent paper showed is associated with longevity if you keep it relatively low. CR can reduce it. Exercise can reduce it. Paribiosis reduces it. Globulins can be up to, you know, twenty five hundred to three thousand milligrams per deciliter. So, again, putting that twenty five hundred to three thousand versus the 80 for glucose or 200 for total cholesterol, globulins are a big tree. And then also looking at fibrinogen. Right? So fibrinogen, two hundred fifty fifty milligrams per deciliter, which again is three times higher around for glucose and then also higher than so those are the biggest protein trees in the blood force. Now does that mean things like Cystatin c, which is point seven milligrams per liter or, 70 micrograms per deciliter is less important? No. There are low abundance proteins in blood like CRP, cystatin c, t and f alpha, IL six, which are in microgram to even picogram. So 10 to the negative six, ten to the negative 12, in terms of grams that are in very low abundance can be very important for tracking during aging. So I'm not putting all of my eggs in the low abundance proteins. I'm looking at the big trees in the forest while also including some of the lower abundance stuff. And then last but not least are the metabolites. Right? So technically, glucose falls into that category. The lip lipoproteins fall into that category. Cholesterol is a metabolite. But then also looking at, you know, quote, unquote novel cutting edge metabolites. Kyunidine divided by tryptophan, EPA and DHA, which, may be important for inflammation or a whole host of stuff. But even those metabolites, creatinine is a metabolite. Right? So, so I'm do also doing metabolomics at every test and really trying to map that in terms of, you know, optimizing multiple biomarkers over time. Interesting. Yeah. So yeah. Like, I guess, yeah, like, people don't think about yeah. Like, if you look at the blood, then how big of a percentage is a certain marker there. Like like you said, glucose is actually, like, a fair fairly small percentage of the total blood in, like, a vial. But, yeah, like, it's still, like, it's predictive of a lot of, like, chronic diseases, like diabetes and, those kind of things. So, yeah, like, I guess, yeah, you still need to, like, look at all of them or, like, as much as possible, and some of them might have, like, bigger prediction value. And I guess it could be also that, you know, most of this there's a lot more studies done on cholesterol and glucose and certain, like, you know, testosterone and these very common markers and almost or very little studies done on actual of these, you know, red blood cells or, white blood cell types. There's a lot of published data on red blood cells and the MCV. All of that stuff, it it's there. It exists. It's just, Compared to, like, glucose and, you know, cholesterol. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. In terms of what's published for sure. You know, more is I wouldn't say more is known though. It's just more of the spotlight is on glucose and the lipids. Right? And for for rightly so because metabolic health is related to cardiovascular disease. Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause, one of the top five leading causes of death depending on, you know, where you are in terms of age. Which then highlights another issue too. Can we look at biomarkers of each of the top five causes of death in centenarians? Right? So what's optimal for lowest risk for CBD, for cancer, for respiratory diseases, for Alzheimer's disease? What are the biomarkers that we can do to keep those, comorbidities low? Right? So for sure, metabolic health is a part of that strategy, but there are a lot of other biomarkers that also feed into that story. Mhmm. What would be like, you know, of course, measuring a lot of biomarkers is also very expensive and, you know, especially do it, like, frequently. What do you think are, like, the lowest hanging fruit, like, maybe at, like, a dozen or or something like that, of biomarkers that, you know, everyone should kind of measure at least, like, once a year? Yeah. So the standard, I I I'd say once a year is probably too little. And, you know, I'm testing now eight times a year. So even that, I could say that's too little. I may have mentioned this on other podcasts with you or others, but, you know, eight times a year is still three hundred fifty seven days that I don't know what the data is. Right? I'm assuming that once every six to eight weeks is representative of that period. But is it? Right? So, but then things like blood pressure or lung function, you know, blowing into spirometer, I can do that daily. So that's a more accurate representation. Eventually, the field has gotta get to the point where it's whatever I'm peeing out or pooing out, that's giving me some more accurate representation of day to day change, and then that'll really supercharge all of this. Alright. So in terms of the basics, even just the standard chemistry panel and complete blood count, which is a $35 USD test, It gives you the white blood cells and differentials, the red blood cells, liver, kidney, glucose, lipids. That's the foundation for me. I started on that. And then if you add things in like HSCRP, now we're at an $80 USD test. But then you would miss things like like you mentioned testosterone, DHEA, sulfate. Androgens decline hardcore during aging. So ignoring and not tracking that, most people are just gonna be on that age related decline and not even know it until probably it's too late. And then how do you get it back? Is TRT replacement therapy, is that the way you wanna go? I don't know about everybody else, but I'm trying to keep my system as youthful as possible so I don't have to take these exogenous agents, you know, and basically reproduce what health looks like. Mhmm. Yeah. Mhmm. But I guess then the then the question is also like, you know, you fixed the blood marker, right, with, let's say, TRT, but, does that actually represent systemic improvement in health? You know, is it like are you optimizing the health or are you optimizing the blood marker? What do you think? Like, because, yeah, you can, like, kinda hack or game a lot of these blood markers even in the short term with, whatever, like, even some supplements or pharmaceuticals. So, what do you think? Yeah. For sure. So I I see that two ways. One is if, testosterone is a certain number and you take it exogenously, now you get it at that certain number, but the mechanisms involved in leading to the decreased testosterone aren't fixed, then I'd say that that's the suboptimal approach. Actually, this the worst approach is doing nothing. Right? You don't even know what your testosterone is fifty years later. It's two fifty or whatever or less. Right? You're just on the age related decline. Taking it exogenously after ignoring it for decades, obviously gonna be better than that, but you then don't address the root cause. So I'm always trying to get after root cause if I can. And, we're talking, like, sometimes even 20 tests later. I'm still looking for root cause to see if I can fix it. And then if I can't, worst case, okay. I'll take it exogenously. Like, my thyroid hormones have been garbage since my twenties. I was diagnosed with hypothyroidism, you know, sonogram, by an endocrinologist. So no matter what I do, I still can't optimize my free t three to free free t four ratio. So now I'm considering having to take exogenous t three instead of t four because my conversion is bad for whatever reason. So for whatever reason for whatever reason, I can't fix the endogenous production, or conversion. So in that case, endogenous would be would be, you know, important. So, for me, I'm a root causes guy, but I think most people don't look at it like that. They just they're like, I'm looking for the optimal number and they don't even address root cause. Which is gonna be more beneficial for health and longevity? I mean, I bet on the person who's got the most youthful milieu for the longest period of time and taking as little of the exogenous agents, only until they have to late late or latest in life. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I think, at some point, you know, to dramatically extend lifespan, you need to do something that is not natural. So, yeah, like, at some point, there needs to be some intervention. I wanna take a quick break to let you know that you can now get my new book, The Longevity Leap on Amazon. It contains 24 chapters ranging from the biology of aging to all the major chronic diseases such as heart disease, kidney disease, neurodegeneration, and I also cover over 70 clinical relevant biomarkers for chronic diseases and their optimal ranges. You can get the book from the link in the description. Yeah. Maybe we can move on with, some of, like, these more conventional blood markers that people know about, like cholesterol or blood sugar and inflammation and those things. So, you know, there's a lot of blood markers that, you know, predict the risk of heart disease and diabetes and kidney disease, and they all, like, interact with each other to a certain extent. Like, diabetes increases kidney disease risk and kidney disease risk increases, heart disease risk, etcetera. So do you have, like, any set of markers that, you would, like, prioritize for, like, this cardiovascular slash metabolic, health? Yeah. I mean, the the standards are pretty good. I mean, glucose, h b a one c, it's hard to include insulin in that because insulin levels can be low in or obviously are low in youth, but also advanced age. So then it become and they peak in early life. So now you've got this inverted u. So you've got a lot of people measuring insulin, not you, but there are a lot of people measuring well, I mean, you've measured it too, but me and me too. There are a lot of people measuring insulin who will say, oh, my insulin is three milli milliattus per mil, you know, and and they're like, this is great. But because insulin is an inverse u, how would you know if it's u fuller aged? Right? And with advanced stage, there's beta pancreatic beta cell failure not producing insulin when you need it. Right? So it goes back to that question of how would you know if that's u fuller aged. Right? So I find that looking at, if glucose is increasing during age with a low insulin, clearly bad. It's the that's insulin resistance. HbA one c clearly increasing during aging, insulin resistance. So I don't find the most value in looking at insulin, but glucose hbA one c, obviously. But then, you know, the lipoproteins. So, whether it's looking at LDL, VLDL, HDL without apo b, we're looking at and lipoprotein a, we're looking at only apo b. I mean, I'm right now, I'm I'm doing the experiment where I'm looking at all of that to see if I I I can only use ApoB as a surrogate for non HDL cholesterol. Like, do I even need the Lipo Panel and just go with ApoB? Right? Or do I need do I need both? Right? So, so those would be the standards, in terms of, you know, measuring for, CBD metabolic health. Mhmm. Right. How do you know that if you have so let's say you're let's say, not very old. You're, like, maybe, you know, in your forties or or something, and you have low insulin, how do you know that it's not to this phenotype of a 80 year old who would also have low insulin? Yeah. So if glucose is increasing, so if your glucose levels have increased over time, that's one sign that low insulin may be bad. Right? Because you would want, to have lower glucose, lower insulin. Right? So and especially if h b a one c is up in that situation too, that suggests that, low insulin may be a sign of pancreatic dysfunction. Why do you think that if with the blood sugar levels, like, a lot of people say that, you know, you need to have very low blood sugar levels and any, like, you know, rise in blood sugar is pathological and is promoting, aging and a lot of the diseases. What do you think? Like, it's because obviously, there's this, like, a sweet spot. Like, too low and too high of anything can be harmful. So if you have, like, you know, zero glucose, then you're dead. And, if it's too high, then you have diabetes. So, like, what's the, like where do you find, like, the sweet spot? Yeah. So that's a great question. And, I think it's a great question because I see that a lot, online. Even from for and not to rain on his parade, but just using Brian as Brian Johnson as an example. Right? So he recently posted in one of his, screenshots, his glu glucose, I think, was 75. Right? So if you look at all cause mortality risk in very big, large epidemiological studies, the one I have in mind is twelve million people. Eighty to ninety four for glucose was associated with lowest risk for all cause mortality. So 75 would be at a significantly higher risk. Right? So so then it goes to your question of where's the speak sweet spot? Can 75 be optimal? And then how would you know? How would you know if seventy five is on the wrong road or is in his case 75 okay. Right? So there's nuance in the detail. So, for example, at very old ages, centenarians, for for example, they can have glucose levels that are less than 80. So what's going on there? Right? Is that just they're super insulin sensitive, and that's an aspect of their longevity? So the other side of that is that the liver is involved in gluconeogenesis. So when we're fasted, part of the liver's job is to make glucose to keep blood blood sugar levels stable, right, and around 80 milligrams per deciliter. So blood glucose levels in someone who's very old are 69, 73, 74. It could be a sign there is liver dysfunction. Okay. So then we go to Brian's, liver enzymes. Right? When I look at his AST and ALT, which follow a j shaped curve with all cause mortality risk, they're actually on the higher ascending portion. What but then we can take that a step further because GGT, which is also a liver enzyme, is a more easily interpretable, biomarker related to liver health and function when compared with AST and AOT because it's basically linear. Lower is better, and as it increases, it's it's worse for all cause mortality risk. So in his case, his GGT is very low. It's eight. It's fantastic. So now we've got this discordant data. AST and AOT is on that j increasing j for all cause mortality risk in terms of, right, AST, LT. But then his GGT is fantastic for livers. Then how do you square that circle? So in at least one study, head to head match up with the highest ten percent for GGT, the highest ten percent of a population for AST and ALT. AST and ALT were associated with increased risk of death for liver disease mortality fourfold, but, GGT was an eightfold higher. Now that suggests that GGT may be a more powerful biomarker of liver disease mortality. So just using Brian's Brian's glucose of 75 as an example, when considering that GGT could be a better biomarker relative to AST and ALT, the GGT suggests his liver function is great. So in that case, it's probably not a gluconeogenesis problem by the liver. His liver function is probably good. That's 75 even though it'll be on the small ascending portion of the j shape for increased all cause mortality risk for glucose, probably good. And his h b a one c is below five, which is also associated with an increased all cause mortality risk, but I bet that that too is related to liver dysfunction, low low low blood glucose, low h b a one c, increased all cause mortality risk below five. But since his g GGT is great, to me, it's just that his, glucose at 75 could be okay. So for people who have glucose less than 80, it's important not to think, oh, I'm great. I would evaluate that within the context of other biomarkers, especially like the liver. Mhmm. Yeah. That's a good point that, you know, there's very a lot of nuance to this and a lot of other biomarkers that also kind of affect what the outcome could be. But, yeah. I mean, you can find a lot of other examples about this as well, like low cholesterol, for example. You know, that's one of the most popular examples that, like, low cholesterol is associated with higher mortality because of x y z studies that do show that. But, maybe you can explain, like, how does these, you know, these other biomarkers actually what do what do they mean in that context? Yeah. So, just before going to the LDL story, which is almost exactly a similar, thing. So, it's it's very easy to use the wrong study to interpret one's data, and I try not to use one study. I mean, that that could be you know, it's what's the field? What's the overall, you know, multitude of studies? Even just looking at a meta analysis sometimes could be misleading because maybe the meta analysis included sick or diabetic populations. Right? So I try to get general population, very large epidemiological studies. So the AOT ALT ASD study I have in mind had 16,600,000 people. I mean, it's hard to get a bigger population based average than that. But then, you know, I I hear pick people with the criticism. They'll say, well, most people are bad diets and overweight. But when you have sixteen point six million people, all of them can't be on, you know, can't be poor health. Right? So Right. And that's the best that we can do. Right? So in contrast, if you have a study of a thousand people and, you know, and someone says, oh, in this study of a you know, in this study, AST or ALT of fifteen was lowest all cause mortality risk. Yeah. But it's a thousand people. Is that representative of the population versus I have a study of sixteen point six million people. Fifteen is associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. You know, it's the larger the sample sample size, it's, basically the closer to the population based average. The other side of that too is what's the follow-up for mortality risk. Right? So for example, if you have a study of only 20,000 people, but the follow-up is fifty years. Right? So you're following them for a very long period of time and then using biomarkers fifty years earlier to predict mortality risk versus if you have a study of, you know, 20,000 people and then the follow-up is five years, you're kinda looking at two different things. Right? It's which is associated with short term mortality versus which is associate associated with a longer fifty year, you know, which is longevity. Right? So it's important to have that context of what's the sample size of the study, and then how long is the follow-up. Most I try to go after the longest follow-up with this big of a sample size that I can, but sometimes it's the opposite where you have it 500,000 people in a ten year follow-up. But then it's a juggling act. Right? Is 500,000 people in a ten year follow-up better than 20,000 people in a fifty year follow-up? Right? So, there is some interpretation to this. Right? But not trying to extrapolate based on the published data and doing nothing, I think, you know, it's it's it's, you know, flawed approach. Mhmm. Alright. So the LDL LDL story? Yeah. Alright. So, I should say too, just a quick shout out. I've got a ninety five minute video on on Patreon detailing all of this. So if anybody wants to see the papers and the references and me actually going through more of the story or the same story, it's on a spec biomarker tier. So just to give that a quick shout out. So apologize for the self promotion and plug. But You you also, like, cover all all biomarker biomarkers. Right? What's the optimal range for them? So there's 27 there for now. I'm gonna build on that based on what I haven't already covered in that video, and it's continuously expand it over time. So so LDL also follows this inverse you during aging, where low in youth, peak in midlife, low in very advanced stage. So it goes to this idea again of how can you know if it's low or advanced stage. So you have obviously, you have two crowds. Right? You have the one crowd who says lower LDL is better as low as possible. Right? There's that big online presence. And then you have the other side who say, look at 80 year olds, these studies in 80 year olds where higher total cholesterol including LDL is associated with lowest all cause mortality risk. Right? Which is true. Both can be true. In youth, you have low LDL. And in 80 year olds having higher LDL and total cholesterol is associated with lower risk of all cause mortality. So there's a study of about 4,700,000 people that was published, I think, last year that addressed this, disparity. And part of it is comorbidity. Right? So, in most studies, you know, when looking at the association for a biomarker with all cause mortality risk, they'll include in their model factors that can impact that association. For example, age, sex, BMI. Right? Glucose if they have it, other lipoproteins if they have it, you know, and just stop there. But there are many comorbidities that can affect the association for just LDL in this case with all cause mortality risk. Or pick your biomarker. Right? It should be every biomarker assessed with all cause mortality should address every as many factors as possible, that can affect that association. Right? For example, just as a side note. Right? It's like healthy user bias. Right? Did the study adjust for physical activity, diet quality, you know, in addition to BMI, age, sex, all of that. Right? So if you leave that out and then somebody's showing that data, is that the story or just healthy user bias? Right? It's hard to know without adjusting the model. So in in in the study that I have I have in mind of this 4,700,000 people where they looked at total cholesterol, LDL triglycerides, and And I think you cited it you cited it in in your, triglyceride video. That's where I, you know, I got it, from this paper too, where less than 45 for triglycerides. Or maybe you didn't. I don't know. May maybe it's just me. But, anyway so, what they did was they adjusted their models sequentially. So the first model was like the standards, age, sex, BMI, and then you see an LDL of relatively higher. One twenty was associated with, like, a 20% lowest CHD. They didn't look at, all cause mortality for l d, LDL in this case. One twenty, twenty percent lower risk of coronary heart disease mortality risk. So that was the first model, age, sex, BMI, and, I don't know, maybe hypertension. Model two, they added a few more factors that could impact that association, and then the risk was reduced, which suggests that the other factors that they added to the model were contributing to the association for LDL will all cause mortality risk. So but so now one twenty was still associated with about a ten percent lower risk, a significant ten percent lower risk for CHD mortality. But then they added other covariates. For example, like dementia, you know, man, it was 11 com comorbidities that they added that aren't kidney disease, liver disease. I mean, these these are things that are not commonly adjusted for that can impact the association for LDL with all cause mortality risk. And when they did that, that one twenty all of a sudden was not associated with all cause mortality risk. And when using that model, 65 to one twenty became the optimal range. And they have beautiful charts in the in the thing where adjusting for all 11 additional factors in addition to the standards, you can see that, you know, the the risk sequentially was reduced. But then also note that less than sixty five was associated with a small but significant CHD mortality risk and then over one twenty for LDL, also an increased all cause mortality risk. So then I went back and looked, and this story again is on Patreon, at the study that shows, and it's in a very large epidemiological study. I think that study, it's, you know, 10,000,000 people or some outrageous number, very high, where, LDLs, I think it was of one thirty to one ninety lowest risk and then above, like, 200 higher risk and then below one twenty higher risk. Right? So how do you square that circle? Yeah. On the one hand, you have, you know, 65 to one twenty, lowest risk. And then on the other, you have anything less than one thirty higher risk. Right? So, so what it came down to for the study with the higher l or lower LDL, higher risk was that they only adjusted for age, sex, BMIs, other CBD, you know, related, you know, were you diagnosed with c cardi preexisting cardiovascular disease and, a couple other factors. They didn't have all of the comorbidities that can impact that association. Whereas in the study that did have it, a 4,700,000 people, that risk dramatically reduced, which suggest suggest that comorbidity was impacting the association. So at advanced stage, the long story short is, in advanced stage, LDL levels drop precipitously in part because of liver dysfunction. So very high GGT is an example. So it makes sense now that people who are 80 years old or 90 years old that have higher total cholesterol probably have good liver function. They can make cholesterol relative to the people who are sick and on that road to death. Their liver function is poor or bad, can't make cholesterol, so they've got lower LDL. The people who have good liver function have higher LDL, and now it makes sense why, you know, higher in that case is better. But I think it's a poor interpretation of of the actual literature, and I think, so that's one side. The other side of it too is when you consider that LDL is low in youth and then it peaks at midlife. I could even make the argument that if your LDL is relatively high, it's aged. That's the aged phenotype. Right? Right. Ideally, it's keeping it as low as possible for as long as possible. But then it also goes to that idea of how do I know if it's youthful or aged. Right? So then looking at those other biomarkers, you know, the other liver function and health biomarkers, even albumin, which is related to the liver. So if albumin is low and, LDL is low, inflammation is high, it's probably a bad sign. And and then last but not least, the the the thing about this whole story that's fascinating me the most lately is that comorbidity biomarker prediction. So prodromal. Right? So the early incidence and predicting of a long term negative health outcome. So how do you know if you were at the you know, your your LDL had increased during aging, and now, oh, it's starting to decrease, and now you're on that slow sloping road to death. And just a I know I could talk forever seems sorry, but, I mean, it's good for good for business, right, when the guest talks forever. But when you look at just bringing this back to, like, fitness and leanness and bodybuilding and all that stuff. Right? When you look at, like, the goats, you know, Frank Zane, Arnold in his day. Yeah. I mean, I've I can go through the list. Right? Big, ripped, lean. You look at them at seventy and eighty, WTF. What happened? What's going on there? You can't tell me that these guys aren't motivated. You know. Or okay. Maybe there's a segment of the people, you know, who were lean and fit and huge at one point, and then they're like, I just don't wanna be like that anymore. Right? Okay. Fine. But then there's also gonna be a segment where they wanna be healthy forever. Right? Or or or and then okay. I'm conflating bodybuilding with health. But Frank Zane was never the is super freaky, huge, you know, a Cutler and Ronnie Coleman. Right? It was always a lean aesthetic. You look at Frank Zane now, no disrespect to Frank Zane, but Frank Zane now does not look like he did. So there's some underlying up, this is my speculation, there's some underlying pathology that goes on that makes it difficult to be able to maintain that lean ripped aesthetic indefinitely. When does it change? Is it at 65? Is it at 70? What's the biochemical process inherent in that? And can we catch it early so that at 90 now we can look like Frank Zane or pick your bodybuilder of choice. Right? So that's a big part of where I'm after now of identifying that biochemical phenotype early and resisting that as early as possible so I can be lean and ripped indefinitely and never, you know, succumb to that age related. Now I just look like an old man. Right? So Right. Yeah. Well, that, you know, the the 70 year old Polish guy that we all just love, Well, he's, like, super ripped, but he's, you know, he's he's probably taking some TRT, I suspect. But that but that that's the small part of it. I but if you look at his physique compared to, like, Frank's I mean, the guy is fit. I know who you're talking about. He's fit. He looks good for his age. He looks just like a fit guy. Right? Even even on TRT, he looks fit. I'm talk I mean, granted, Frank Zane, those guys probably on steroids back then too. Mhmm. And I'm not saying carrying that much muscle is optimal for longevity and resisting aging. But, you know, at some even like Jacqueline, I don't know if you're familiar with Jacqueline, but Jacqueline was, you know, fit and aesthetic and lean. And when I looked at you look at Jack in his nineties, it's just, you know, this slow walking, poor slow gait, 95 year old man. This is one of the most highly motivated people that has ever lived. Would say things like, I can't die. It'll be bad for my image. Swimming, like, you know, hundreds of miles at, like, 70 to prove he's super fit at that age, and then all of a sudden, it changes. There's some biochemical phenotype in that, and I don't think it's just aging. I think a big part of this is cachexia. You know, whether it's it's it's cancer related or just the physiological decay that accompanies cachexia of not just sarcopenia where it's lean mass wasting, but it's also fat mass that declines towards end of life. Mhmm. And all of the tissue dysfunction that's associated with cachexia too. So I'm deep down that hole now and trying to figure out, you know, what are the biomarkers of this cachexic phenotype where you're just decaying. You're still alive, but you're basically literally dying and decaying and decomposing over ten or fifteen a ten or fifteen year period. Mhmm. Yeah. That's super interesting. Yeah. Like and, it actually ties in with the the, like, cholesterol and mortality risk as well. So, like, one additional thing that you see with low cholesterol is malnutrition. So if you're malnourished and undereating or like, you know, anorexic or yeah. Like an elderly person who is 80 years old and they're super underweight and frail, they also have malnutrition. They're not eating and they also have low cholesterol. So this is another this comorbidity that lowers your cholesterol quite a lot. And, you know, if you have frailty malnutrition and you also have low cholesterol, you know, you're not dying to the low cholesterol, although you have low cholesterol. You're dying to, like, the frailty and malnutrition. Right? So that kinda skews the data again. So if you are, like, not malnourished, you have good muscle mass and, you know, good fitness, then the low cholesterol isn't the bad thing. It's, probably, like, better than having high cholesterol at that situation. And if you have, you know, frailty and, like, let's say, like, sarcopenia and low muscle mass and those things, then, yeah, maybe if you have high cholesterol, it just means that you're not under nutrition. Like, you're just eating enough specifically, like, maybe animal protein or something, which would prevent you from becoming malnourished and sarcopenic and that prevents you from dying. Like, you have the adequate muscle tissue and just just body weight that prevents you from dying to falls or something like that. So but if you stop eating, your your cholesterol goes down, your muscle mass and all bone density goes down, then you probably, like, died to some of these, yeah, like, wasting, diseases. But which is it cause or consequence? Right? Is it quote, unquote and then even defining malnourished can be debatable. Right? I mean Right. You know, it's like, do we have the prescription now? You know? Is your diet or my diet giving me all of the nutrients I need to be on the slowest aging rate? Right? And then, you know, when you hear even like done eating paste just as an example, you know, that's including an epigenetic prediction of, like, v o two max, waist to hip ratio, you know, visceral fat as a indirect predictor. It's got the CBD biomarkers, glucose. It's got inflammation HBA one c. Sorry. HS CRP, and it's got, so metabolic health. Right? But it leaves out blood pressure. It leaves out lung function. You know, it's got kidney it's got kidney there. So I think it's a statin c. So but what I'm trying to say is that, you know, we could technically all be somewhat malnourished just at different degrees. Right? And then play that out over a fifty year period. Now where we just, you know, it's that okay. Maybe it's not a 1% loss of muscle mass per year or whatever that rate is, but, you know, it's a smaller rate now for people who are actually trying to be fully nourished and optimal nutrition. Play that forward fifty years, and now you still look malnourished because it's still you've reduced the rate, but it's still you know, you delay there. Right? So I don't know which comes first there, whether you know, I I think the the malnourished, it's actually the other, you know, that's the, people in that state are basically the comorbid state where they decay. I think, you know, they'll take, like, the the the malnourished that they're doing is basically look they're looking at, like, albumin levels and saying, oh, this person is malnourished. I don't think it's just that simple to say eat more calories, your albumin goes up. I I I don't have that experience. Like, there are specific things in my data that are correlated with albumin, and calorie intake is not one of them. And, actually, other clients I work with, calorie intake not not associated with albumin, just as an example. So although malnourished can be defined as low albumin, I'm not sure that that's a diet thing or a committed comorbidity thing where it's just, you know, you've got this underlying pathology whether it's liver cancer that leads to less abdomen and blood and now they're you qualify in the malnourished phenotype, or it's a specific and or the combination of poor diet and you're really malnourished, and it leads to, you know, the frailty phenotype. But, you know, it does that then does that go to is, you know, Arnold and Frank Zane and these these Jacqueline, these bodybuilders, are they just somewhat malnourished for decades and they end up looking like they do at 80 versus when they looked at 40? I mean, I I don't know how that's Mhmm. Arnold now has changed his diet from what I've seen, and he hasn't reverted his body type back to where it was. Right? So there's more going on there. For sure. Yeah. Yeah. So elucidate elucidating that. I mean, it's just a matter of quantifying. Right? It's just a matter of seeing the patterns in the matrix and identifying which biomarkers and tracking that and making sure I try to catch it sooner than later. That's atop my list my list now. So just a another quick add on that story. I don't know if you saw the, paper where, the, one day of fasting, two days of fasting, 2040% CR in mice, and they looked at, lifespan. So, anyway, they they heavily mapped so many biomarkers, in association with longevity. And the long story short there was that, you know, even for the mice that were 40% or 20% CR, all the groups, towards about the last 25% of life, all of them losing body weight. Like so this is a definite and it happens in people too. There's a definite physiological and biochemical phenotype that's going on for some fraction towards the end of life that's worse than aging. Right? It it's aging is you're getting worse. You were getting worse, worse, worse, and then the shit hits the fan, and it's just you're just decomposing while you're still alive. So Mhmm. Yeah. I'm not just trying to resist aging. I'm trying to resist that decomposition phase too where it's you know? Now it's two things we've got. If I conquer aging and I don't know what I would call it. The cache cachexia or, you know, so yeah. Yeah. Yeah. For sure, like, you see older people are very, like, becoming smaller versions of themselves and wasting away. Do you think, like, some of these blood markers, can be useful for, like, assessing biological age as well? I know there's, like, the PhenoAge clock that uses a search few of these blood markers to calculate biological age. What do you think about that? Yeah. So pheno pheno age is a good clock. So I actually made a video recently of how good is it looking at its correlation with chronological age and then all cause mortality risk. The correlation with chronological age, people do have some problem with that because it includes chronological age in its model. Nonetheless, even if you take that out, you take out the QC number and just look at year to year change, if your biomarkers all stay the same, pheno age will increase by point nine years per year. So it's not just about I think I think a lot of people, you know, not to just call out Brian, but, you know, will say my biological age is x and they'll cite one test or two tests. This is not how it should be done in my opinion. It's year to year change, multiple tests per year, and then tracking it for a long period of time. You know? So even if pheno age isn't perfect because it has chronological aids in in its model, it is associated with all cause mortality risk. Right? An older pheno age, a higher all cause mortality risk. And I've got a video coming out soon on menopause as an example. So an older biological age, earlier age at menopause, shorter life expectancy. So so it is an important and there's a multitude of other studies that show its importance in association with, like, COVID related deaths. So, it's an important, tool. But year to year change for just pheno age, I see value there. But then the other side of it there is, you know, for people who have issues with, quote, unquote, biological age clocks, and I'm not talking about epigenetics. I may agree with some of those criticisms or most of them. But for the actual biomarker based clocks where, you know, in in PhenoAge, you know, it's albumin, h s c r p, glucose, white blood cells. Which biomarkers are people having a problem with in that in that in that, set. Right? And then knowing how those biomarkers change during aging and then plotting them each individually. Are you resisting age related changes? Right? Albumin declines during aging precipitously. Right? So if was your albumin five grams per deciliter at, you know, 20? And 20 later, is it still five? Okay. You're doing a good job of resisting its age related change. Right? So I try not to focus too much on the singular biological age metric. It's a QC number. It's, you know, I don't wanna say it's clickbait. It's not because, again, it it is related to clinical based outcomes. But I find the most value tracking year to year change, not just for the biological age tool, but each of the individual biomarkers. But then you can expand that. Right? So the biomarkers of liver health and kidney health and lung function and blood pressure, year to year change for all of them, and then showing them. So I'm planning on showing that data and videos at some point. How well or how not? Where are weak spots? Where are strengths? You know, and showing that approach because I think a lot of the field is just so hyper focused on, you know, this is my Dunedin pace. And, man, one test over three hundred sixty five days is representative. I don't know. Yeah. Because there's a lot of variation can be like fluke test. Like, you know, I've measured a few, like, inflammatory markers, and they can be sometimes just, you know, very high because of whatever, reason. And then you do it a few weeks later and it's down to normal. So, yeah, like, a lot of markers, if if you measure them only, yeah, like, once, you might not get the full picture and, they can change quite quite rapidly. But then it gets to how many times per year can you minimize that that variability. Right? So around every test, I have a standardization approach. So for example, if you did a hard workout and you blood test the next day, that's probably what led to the elevated inflammatory markers on the on the next day. So knowing that, my last workout is two to three days before every blood test standardized. Like, it isn't five days away. It's not one day away. Every test, two to three days, sometimes four days before the test, no hard workout. So that doesn't mean no exercise for the two to three to four days before the test, but just titrating activity downward so that the overtrained phenotype is not impacting the blood blood test results. And then, obviously, hydration before the test. So if you go into the test and haven't con you know, drank any water, and then you're just just happen to be more hydrated that day or less hydrated versus an earlier test, that can affect the results too. Right? So as soon as I wake up, 20 ounces of water, and then I try to test exactly at the same time, every test, 07:30 to eight, for every test going back years to try to minimize time of day and hydration status, their impact on biomarkers. But then also the fasting window. Right? Like, you know, just what's recommended is say an overnight fast. But for some people, that's eight hours, could be twelve hours. Maybe I fast for seventeen hours. Right? The fasting window could potent and I say could potentially because I don't know. Right? I'd have to do the experiment, and that's a whole different I need a different Michael Luskard to run these experiments. I can't do them all myself. Right? So, I've standardized the fasting window where early on in 2015, it was, like, seventeen hours. So I just was like, I'm just gonna stick to it. For every test, seventeen to eighteen hour window, no food, some water, but, you know, so for every test, standardizing fasting window, hydration status morning of the test, exercise, the last hard workout before testing, and that can help minimize some of that test to test variability. In my case, my data is not variable at all. You know, and if I see a spike in something, then I'm like, okay. Something I did was out of whack. I just have to figure out what it was. Mhmm. Yeah. That's a good good, tip that, try to do things the same way around the tests. Like, yeah, they can be more accurate, that way. And, you know, over time, you will get, like, some sense of, what things are more, like, normal and what kind of things are very vary quite more often. But then that goes to the issue of how many tests per year do you need to really get a full representation of what your data actually is. Because if it's only once per year and then you fast forward that and then something pops up crazy, then what? Then does someone start testing to try to figure out if that's aberrant data or not? And then maybe it's too late at that point. Right? So I'm not saying it has to be a test like me. I do work with a client who does 12 tests or more. And sometimes it's like for things like urine, I mean, you can do that all the times. The 50 tests over a few months, you know, so, but testing enough where you can say, this is where my data usually is over some period of time, I think is huge. A huge part of this story. For example, I'll give you another quick story. HRV resting heart rate is another good one because just like blood pressure and lung function, I don't have to pull blood. Right? So so my data had been and not obviously, not as good as yours yet. I mean, you're you know, I don't know if my data was like yours at your age, but for my chronological and I hate to be in that boat. I hate to be in the boat of for my chronological age. It's good, but it's not where yours is. Right? But in time, we'll we'll see if I can get it back there. But so 6742, heart rate variability, resting heart rate. Good for my chronological age. So that's where it was for a couple of years. And then summer last year, all of a sudden, HRV is starting to go down, resting heart rate is starting to go up. Nighttime respiratory rate is starting to go up. I mean, my but this is like deep sleep starting to go down. So I'm like and this is this was going on for eight months. So I'm like, what is this aging? It's the it's the mind f of, is this where it goes? Is this the end? Have I run my run and now now I'm on that kykektic thing and that's that's it. Right? So I've been using earplugs, silicone earplugs, and I'm convinced this is what it is because, so silicone earplugs, because I live on a busy street in Boston. I mean, I live across the street from the fire department. The police cars at all hours of the night. There are bums on the street yelling at two in the morning. There are party type people like, Earplugs. I have to. Like so but the problem with that is after a couple days, they would smell, and I thought nothing of it. I just shove them back on my ears. And, you know, I changed them out. I'm not a dirtbag where, you know, I'm using the same earplugs for months. Every three, four days, take a new one. Right? So, in late last month, my ear basically blew up. Like, I'm talking blew up. I took pictures. I may show this in a video at some point, but blew up. I've never had this ever. We're, like, completely red swollen. So, and it was from ear it had to be from the earplugs. So I stopped to you I stopped using the earplugs. Now, and I should say too that, my heart rate variability, resting heart rate when my ear blew up looked like immune activation after vaccination. And for the people who are anti vaccination, that's your thing. You know, it was forced by work. I didn't have a choice. That's a whole different discussion. Right? But immune activation after vaccination, spiked my nighttime respiratory rate, tanked HRV, increased resting heart rate. It was only for two days I recovered. But the ear infection did the same thing to those data that immune activation following vaccination. So it did something to me systemically. Now if we backtrack those eight months and, you know, probably was subclinical where, you know, there's a smell on the on the earplugs. So it was probably, you know, a moist environment for microbial in additional microbial growth. Some of that may have leaked into my blood over an eight month period Right. Making all of those data worse. Now, okay, so now I stopped earplugs, which sucks because I'm getting awakened by these clowns on the street every night, which is terrible. Anyway, so the last two days, sixty eight forty, six sorry, two of the last three days around a workout. Sixty eight forty, sixty six forty one. And also my recoveries post workout have been slowed where it's taken like two, three, four, five days to get back to just even like 55, 44, which is to me, aged data. I hadn't had data like that in four, five years. The long story short is no earplugs. My body is finally starting to recover, to this thing that I did to it. But, if I wasn't tracking it long term over time, who knows what kinda systemic damage I would have done? You know? So, anyway That's yeah. Very interesting. Trying trying to catch it early. Right? Yeah. I had, like, maybe, like, not in, like, a very similar story, but on the same realm that, I stayed, like, at a hotel that had, like, a bit of mold. And then I saw, like, my inflammatory marker, the TNF alpha was, like, elevated, and now it's, like, low normal again. So even, like, some mold exposure in whatever place when you're traveling or something that can, you know, like, also kind of cause a short term, like, a spike in some of these different markers. The thing is if it's if it's, like a subclinical dose, like, in that case, it was an acute dose. You saw the effect immediately. But imagine if the amount of mold, some may you know, where you live or wherever it may be, you've got that, you know, slowly impacting your data over a long period of time. And you had physiological metrics that told you something's wrong, but the only way you would know something's wrong is if you had so much data to actually know what what TF is going on here. This is not normal. Right? So it it you know, anyway, it took my ear blowing up basically super red and giant to say some and the only thing that was causing that was it was literally earplugs. Like, as soon as I took the earplug the earplugs were in that night and when it blew up, it was like, it's gotta be the earplugs. So imagine if I didn't have that problem. Yeah. I wouldn't have known this and I'd continue using it for years, perpetually making myself worse and worse. Who knows what kind of, and maybe I did some damage I can't undo because of the eight month period. Right. Yeah. What do what do you think about, like, the heavy metals? So you can also measure them in the blood and, you know, excess heavy metals are kinda harmful. Do you measure them, and, how do you, like, prioritize them? Yeah. Wait. I'll answer that. I promise. But going back to TNF alpha, that's, I recently measured that too. I hadn't measured it in a long time. TNF alpha IL six are part of the senescence associated secret secretory phenotype. They're two of the pro inflammatory cytokines that increase during aging in part because the senescence associated secretory phenotype increases during aging. So senescence cells increase during aging. So those are on my radar for tracking at every test, because, I mean, if you're not tracking markers of senescent cells, we're just basically pure right? It's a it's it's a mechanism we may be missing with the standard biomarker. So in my case, TNF alpha, IL six below the detection limit. So I'm not gonna measure them again. Probably do that once a year. And if I start to see that above the detection limit, then it's eight times a year. I'm not messing around. Gotta figure out the recipe to keep it low. Heavy metals. So I have measured, lead. Lead was below the detection limit. I don't know if that's because of the water filter that I use, but I do eat cacao beans, which I have, and I make my own chocolate. Cocoa beans are well known to have lead. So, but I don't eat them that much that that could spike lit. But nonetheless, my lead levels were below the detection limit. Haven't measured the others like cadmium or, arsenic. I haven't I eat a lot of sardines, so maybe arsenic could be high. At some point, I'll I'll add the others. But for now, lead is low, which is good news. Mhmm. Yeah. There was a recent report, like, protein powders are quite high in lead, most of them. So that's, like, unfortunate. Like, I I use some protein powders quite regularly. And, yeah, like, it's yeah. Unfortunate a lot of, you know, you know, cacao can have heavy metals, fish, water that you drink, and, those things. So yeah. Have you measured? It's definitely, like, worthwhile to, like, kinda test heavy metals. Definitely. Have you measured lead? Was was your lead, It was, like, a little bit higher than it should be, but, it hadn't been in the past when I was also using protein powder. So I don't know, like, maybe I changed something else, but or maybe I was just using too much protein powder or a different brand. I don't know specifically, but I didn't know exactly what would be the reason why it would be high. Maybe the protein powder, but, yeah, I'll I'll, like, change it up and measure it again in in a few months. Yeah. So along those lines, back when I was doing protein powders, I was getting and I'm not obviously, I'm not affiliated. I'm not sponsored by them, you know. But Naked Whey, just trying to avoid all the chemical additives that are added to protein powders just in general. So Naked Whey was literally just grass fed, you know, whey. Right? But then you could even get into the idea of, you know, rabbit holes, man. Rabbit holes. So, you know, denatured. Right? Concentrate. Like, which version is gonna be best absorbed? So I'm minimizing the ability of it to not get fully absorbed, and then it makes it to my colon, which is then fermented into metabolites that can negatively impact health. Protein fermentative back bacterial metabolites are not good for health. So, anyway, without going down that rabbit hole, I had naked whey, but it there's no additives. Right? So it tastes terrible. Mhmm. I have to add it to I had to add it to stuff, but even then, the taste wasn't wasn't great. So there's a balance there between, you know, naked way, no additives, probably no lead or very low lead, and what can you add to, you know Yeah. And you need to add some berries or something. I've got a loss. Yeah. Yeah. Maybe we can, then, like okay. Let's say you have, like, some unlimited budget and you have access to all the tests in the world, you know, and we don't have to start naming, like, all these hundreds of tests that you would do. But, what would be, like, a over general overview of, like, if you had, like, the best, testing capability, what would you, like, test in categories like? Yeah. I don't think it would be as expensive as most people say. Like, you know, so so, again, starting from the top. Right? The body composition and physical function. So DEXA, once a year. So that's, depending on where you go in The US, it can be a 100 USD, somewhere in that ballpark. VO two max can be $50 USD test. I mean, grip strength or even just tracking your own strength, and performance during workouts. So my workouts are standardized. I don't change it up. I do a variety of movements movements, you know, through a variety of different planes. I'm not just in the, you know, standard plane. I'm doing spinning and rotation. I'm trying to optimize mobility, flexibility, balance, all these things too, not just strength. Granted, I'm not as big as you, but anyway, the point is I track sets, reps, you know, strength for all of the compound movements. So I could catch functional decrements as soon if they happen. Right? So even if someone's not paying to go do a VO two max, you can track in workout performance for a very long period of time and see if your performance has stayed the same. You know, there's this there's more is better. Right? And I always have to get stronger. I always have to get fitter. There's a cap. We all have a genetic limit. Right? There for me, there is a win in maintenance. Right? Now you could say, if you're just maintaining, you're on you're on the you're you're gonna get worse. But for sure, always the goal is to optimize, but maintaining is a win in my eyes. So top tier. Right? Even just that standard $35 test, now you're doing the red blood cells, white blood cells, platelets, liver, kidney, metabolic health. Add in the, HSCRP, we're at $80. Cystatin c, probably a big one for, older ages because creatinine levels can be higher because of poor kidney function and lower because of less muscle mass. But then you could add other stuff into that kidney function equation like bun, uric acid, which increase when kidney function is bad. So even if creatinine is not a good marker, you've got those two cheap markers that are included on the $35 USD test. So, other inflammatory markers, even adding t and f I l six, those are expensive. But, if, like I said, if you're below the detection limit, I wouldn't do it eight times a year. But just the standards. I mean, just like I said, you've got the oh, and, you know, and then a blood pressure cuff, that's, you know, a $100. The the the lung function meter, that's, you know, 150. For a 100 just the standard blood test alone, $100 can go very far from, you know, metabolic health, kidney, liver. You know, one doesn't doesn't have to go through the metabolomics or epigenetics to get a lot of value for their money, while also focusing on the top tier, you know, function and leanness. Right? So, I think a lot can be done for a lot less than people think. But then the question is, you know, would I need a $2,000 or more MRI once a year? Right? Would that be better than looking at the biomarkers eight times a year? I think having an MRI is probably important. I don't know the testing frequency there yet. Looking at actual, atherosclerosis buildup, you know, so, carotid ultrasound, probably important at least once a year, just to see if there's any plaque and progression over time. And if there is plaque, then and I haven't done this yet. I'm guilty there. My my rationale is and it's probably weak, but, eventually, I'll have to include, the carotid ultrasound. But my rationale is my lipoproteins have been low relative, you know, relatively low for decades, so I should be at low risk. CRP is less than detection limit for three years in a row, 20 something plus test. I should be at low risk for CBD, but having the true biomarker measure, and that's not an expensive test. It's like a 150 USD, the ultrasound. So the big question is the therapeutics. Right? So, you know, which, quote, unquote, advanced therapies will, quote, unquote, rejuvenate. Right? How expensive will that be? Will it even make a dent? That that to me is the big black box of, of longevity. Yeah. Because, yeah, you could spend, you know, thousands and, tens of thousands of dollars, on that. But, I think, yeah, like, most of the valuable information comes from the kind of 8020 kind of a pre principle that, some of the very fundamental markers. And and we also have to, yeah, like, realize what we don't know. You know? Yes. There's all these markers, but, you know, we don't necessarily know how do they if if if at all, they would actually predict thylongioatin. And, maybe in, you know, five to ten years, we'll have more understanding about it. But, yeah, up until that point, you might not need to spend, you know, a ton of money on, more like fringe or, let's say, more experimental markers and just focus on the kind of basic fundamentals? Yeah. So even though even though there aren't clinical trials that say based on this biomarker profile, this is how long you're gonna live. I mean, to me, it just makes the most sense that if all of your, you know, organ and systemic function biomarkers are what you'd expect to find in youth and are associated with the lowest all cause mortality risk. That's the best we can do. Right? You're literally squeezing the genetic orange in terms of how long you'll you'll live. Like, if your genetic max was 80, you'll get to 80, maybe not 60. Right? Or genetic max a 100, maybe you get to 80. So, you know, yeah, that's the best we can do with things like HBOT or, you know, red light or hydrogen water. I mean, you know, I I don't know what the ROI is on these things yet, but even there, I'd I'd wanna see biomarker changes. Show me some, you know, outcome biomarker measure, some outcome measure that improves in response to these things. Otherwise, it's just placebo. Right? Mhmm. Yeah. Absolutely. Well, yeah. It's a great talking with you, and, yeah, we'll we'll probably have to do, like, a follow-up in the future. But, yeah, where can people learn more about you and your work? Cool. Thanks, Seem. Anytime. Conquer aging or die trying. I'm all over the interwebs. Reach out if you wanna know more. Yeah. And where can people learn the Patreon as well? Ah, yeah. Patreon.com, Michael Lustgarten. Just do a Google search. Find it. Alright. We'll put the links in the show notes. But, yeah, it was a great talking with you. I, you know, I usually ask, like, what's the one piece of advice? I wish you you we wish you had opted sooner, but you've answered it already several times. So unless if that's changed. Yeah. But it but the maybe I didn't answer it directly. It's track. Right? It's Yeah. Yeah. You know, track as much as you can. I know it can be rigorous for most people, you know, like, for example, tracking diet. Most people don't wanna do that. Or e even tracking supplements. Right? There's gotta be can't just be biomarkers. It's gotta be, how do I know what's impacting these things? And in order to do that, you need data. Right? You need to have some tracked information. Otherwise, it's gonna be a lot of guesswork trying to figure out what's causing what. Right? So Yeah. Track. I track. Track. Track. Track. You know? Yeah. Absolutely. Cool. Well, yeah. Thanks for coming, and, I'll see you around. Ciao. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Siim. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.