I haven't been drinking alcohol for the last ten years. I was around 20 years old back then, and it was one of the best decisions I've ever made. Especially for my health and longevity as my liver has the biological age of only nine, as shown by the Symphony age organ test. Now I do think that some alcohol is still fine, and you don't need to be completely sober to be healthy. But regardless, you'll find this video very informative. You can use it as inspiration for quitting alcohol, as well as knowing how much alcohol you can get away with. First of all, why did I stop consuming alcohol? The biggest reason was because it just got in the way of exercise and gym performance. I saw that even having a few drinks on the weekend was setting back my progress or keeping me at a plateau. Case in point, alcohol does nothing beneficial for your fitness, although you can make it work with small amounts. I was also only a social drinker, which means that I was consuming alcohol only on the weekends or when I went out with my friends. I never consumed alcohol alone when I was, like, watching TV or just, relaxing. I have consumed alcohol on a handful of occasions over these ten years. At our wedding with my wife, I had some wine and also on our honeymoon, but not any more than one to two drinks. So the biggest reason I stopped drinking alcohol was because I realized that it wasn't doing any benefits to my health and it didn't help me to achieve my fitness goals. The hangovers were especially, like, kind of, a waste of time in my opinion, and, I didn't need to have alcohol to have fun or to socialize. Alright. So what were the biggest things I experienced after stopping alcohol consumption? First, it's much easier to stay lean and build muscle. Alcohol still has calories, and binge drinking can easily make you gain weight. Alcohol is especially harmful for your visceral fat and liver health. Drinking even one to two drinks per night can keep your visceral fat higher than what's optimal, even if you're otherwise physically active and normal body weight. My visceral fat is the lowest in the world that I've seen, only 54 grams. And I think one of the reasons is because of not drinking alcohol. Normal visceral fat is below 500 grams. Next, my skin health is also excellent. I never had problems with skin per se, but when I was 18 years old, I definitely had worse looking skin than I do right now. Maybe it was because of the teenage years or something. But as an adult, drinking regularly tends to give you pimples because of the way it affects your liver, and your skin would definitely be a lot more dry, which makes it look older and with more wrinkles. My mental clarity and productivity is also high. I don't want to brag, but I'm very productive and creative every day. I write on average 1.5 books per year, and they're not some pamphlets. They're hundreds of pages and include thousands of references to studies. I don't necessarily think that, the reason I'm productive is because of not drinking alcohol. There are plenty of people who are way more productive than I am and they still drink alcohol. The point is that I'm mentally locked in and I don't want anything else that would hinder that ability to hinder my productivity to get in the way. Again, most people can probably drink a few drinks and be fine with their health as well as productivity. I just prefer not to do that. But what does the research say about alcohol consumption? We all understand that excessive alcohol consumption is bad for you. However, there's a commonly shared idea that drinking moderate amounts of alcohol is actually healthier for you than complete abstention. Those who never drink have been seen to have a nine percent higher risk of death compared to one to three drinks per week, but those results are often confounded by healthy user bias and socioeconomic status. People who are wealthier drink in moderation, and that is one of the reasons you see moderate alcohol consumption being linked to lower mortality risk. People who don't drink any alcohol might have also some health problems such as they were previously alcoholic, so they have some liver failure or something, and that skews the statistics because the average person still consumes alcohol. People who are completely sober and abstain from all alcohol make up a fraction of the society, maybe a single digit percentage, whereas over ninety percent of people tend to consume some alcohol. Analyses that control for these factors find that regular alcohol consumption isn't linked to lower mortality, meaning that if you're otherwise healthy, then drinking zero alcohol isn't going to increase your mortality, so you're safe. A 2018 analysis of five hundred and ninety two prospective and retrospective studies in a 195 regions of the world found that the risk of all cause mortality and cancers rises with increasing levels of consumption, and the level of consumption that minimizes health loss is zero when controlling for confounding variables. Case in point, you might get away with drinking a few drinks per week. Drinking every day one to two drinks probably is too much because you'll end up consuming, like, over seven drinks per week. But if you just consume alcohol, like, one to two drinks a few times per week, then that's not going to have any significant effect on your health or blood markers with everything else being equal. You just have to look at your own blood markers, especially your liver enzymes, inflammation levels, your kidney markers, and your triglycerides. Ideally, you would also want to measure your visceral fat with a DEXA scan. But if you have like a beer belly or this kind of pot belly, then that's a sign generally of too much visceral fat. But there's nothing that would really say that complete abstention from alcohol has any negative effects on your health compared to moderate alcohol consumption. Some small amounts of alcohol can be fine. If you need alcohol for stress relaxation or sleep, then you might have some other problems, and alcohol isn't really helping your stress or sleep. What if you still consume alcohol occasionally? Here are some of the healthier options. Red and white wine are generally the healthiest alcohols because they're not high in sugar, and they also contain different polyphenolic compounds that mitigate the alcohol's effects on the liver. One to two glasses of red or white wine is the max I'd go with. Beer and ciders are one of the worst alcohols because they're high in calories and they don't have any nutritional qualities. You do get some b vitamins and ferulic acid from beer, but you could eat sourdough bread for much larger amounts. Strong and pure spirits such as vodka, gin, or tequila are not healthy in of itself, but they're better than beer or cider because they don't have that much sugar. However, the spirits are also higher in ethanol, which means they can get you drunk a lot faster. That's why no more than one shot. The absolute worst alcohols are all different cocktails like margaritas, mojito, mai tais, etcetera, because they're very high in sugar and calories. They're also easy to drink, meaning you can end up drinking way too many because they taste sweet. Whenever you're drinking alcohol, there are some supplements that you can take to mitigate the damage and protect your liver. They are glycine and NAC because they increase gulathan that helps to detox alcohol. Check out my videos about taking NAC with my wife next. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click a like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is Cee. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.