If you're speaking to an MD and you say the term detox, they're gonna think, oh, it's quackery. But, the reality is we we do bioaccumulate these different forms of environmental exposures and store it in our tissues. All of our collective efforts in history for in medicine and health care science have kind of all culminated into what we know now know as precision medicine. Welcome to the Seamnan podcast. Our guest today is doctor Anil Bajnath. Anil is the founder and president of the American Board of Precision Medicine and the Institute for Human Optimization. Anil, welcome to the show. Thank you for having me. It's a pleasure. Yeah. I'm excited to have you on the podcast. And, I guess we can start with, you could explain people what it is, like, precision medicine. So it's something many people might have a vague understanding of, but, it's also like a relatively new, term. So, what is it specifically? Well, no. And I I think that's a great question. So I feel as though, like, all of our collective efforts in history medicine and health care science and its various applications have kind of all culminated into what we know now know as precision medicine. We've reached this point in our understanding of, you know, human physiology stemming from the genome all the way up the molecular level to our structural composition, that embodies, you know, who we are as a as a our existing being, that could be quantified on multiple different sublevels. And, just to put it simply, you know, precision medicine is defined by the NIH as the interface between biology, lifestyle, and environment. To me, that just sounds like really good medicine. Right? How do we look at these different, molecular associations between our genotype and our environment? And if there's a mismatch, what how does that influence our, you know, our pathophysiology or potential for developing disease? So, you know, again, precision medicine is is mostly all encompassing this interface between biology, lifestyle, and environment, and, you know, which has led me, you know, down multiple different levels of study from genomics and its clinical application to exposomics and how there are these different environmental factors that influence, our gene expression. Right. So it's a very, like, individualized form of medicine of, not looking at people as a big population of people, but also just mostly looking at individuals and, their specific genes and environment. That's that's one way of putting it. I definitely think that, you know, it's it's highly individualized medicine. And what you're referring to with the population based studies is that in the literature, and and conventional academia, belief that, the larger the n value of a clinical study that gets down to a p value of 0.05 has its clinical relevancy and impact on decision making on whether or not to do a drug or not a drug. Right? That's like the the gold standard of what we call evidence based practices, getting these really large end values at which again, an end value is the amount of participants in a clinical study. And the higher the value, the stronger the data. Right? But what's missing from that concept is, you know, everybody that's in this study has a very unique genotype and a unique phenotype. And that genotype influences the receptivity to intervention. And, you know, one clinical kind of application to that is the the concept of pharmacogenomics, where if we're studying a very specific, drug or herbal supplement or whatever it is, you know, for for intervention, an individual's genotype or book of life, you know, influences their receptivity to the drug based on the rate of metabolism. Right? As you may know, there are certain people that are very slow metabolizers of certain drugs. Right? Their cytochrome p four fifty pathways, you know, two d six, one a one, you know, c 19, all these different subdivisions, within the liver that metabolizes that drug. And some people could be very slow or some people could be very fast. And that influences their receptivity to that intervention and whether or not, you know, dosing and everything else, which ties into the pair, precision medicine paradigm of being able to have the the right patient with the right medication at the right dose at the right time, you know, to kind of really, you know, improve their outcomes. But, again, that large population based narrative is going I think shifting towards what we know as n of one medicine, where essentially, you know, you are gonna be at the center of your own clinical study, where looking at all those different individual compositional, components influences your, your health outcomes. So I think this this shift from the end of October and and and high values towards end of one medicine is gonna be a a very important component in the personalization of medicine. How what what would be, like, the balance between them? Because, obviously or, you know, I wouldn't say that it's possible on a large scale to do this n equals ones for, like, you know, 8,000,000,000 people. So, but and there's also a lot of things that just apply to everyone. Just, you know, don't be overweight and exercise and, you know, general principles of a healthy diet and, you know, sleep, etcetera. So how do you find, like, a balance between the specifics of the individual and just the general, main fundamentals of a healthy lifestyle? So that's a great question. And I think that, there's a couple of different ways to view this. And, you know, definitely, diet, lifestyle, and environment needs to be optimized, right, regardless. Right? But when it comes down to the practice of medicine and personalizing it and extrapolating, you know, the the application to the individual sitting in front of you, you know, you really need to look at, you know, what we're talking about specifically. So, you know, there's there's multiple different kind of examples here, and I would say one of the the more classical examples will be, you know, looking at somebody's receptivity to a statin drug medication. Right? With the exception of simvastatin, the bulk of all the other drugs go through a very specific, pathway within the liver detox. And individuals that are maybe nonresponders to statin drug medication, Sloco one b one specifically, right, might be individuals that don't respond well to drug therapy and are the ones that experience a lot of the side effects. Right now in in The US, we have, these standards of care, which are basically developed in this scenario by the ACC, American College of Cardiology, and American Heart Association with the National Lipid Association also weighing in on how to manage cholesterol. Right? And if somebody comes to you and they have high cholesterol, the knee jerk reflex is to throw them on a statin. Right? But as we know, there are multiple different factors that exceed diet and lifestyle. Unfortunately, that influences familial hypercholesterolemia. So there's a subset of the population that have genes that predispose them despite being on a healthy diet and lifestyle towards high cholesterol. Right? And this could be triglycerides, LDL, and and all even apo, apo b particles, l p little a particles. Right? And we need to use that information to kind of risk stratify an individual to the targeted intervention. Right? So I I think that, you know, not to take away from diet and lifestyle and everything else, which is, I think, foundational framework, for building a healthy home, you know, you being the home. Once you start seeing these imbalances manifest clinically, as a physician, we need to be able to, I think, go back to your blueprints, right, and look at, hey. You know, what, you know, what is your polygenic risk score associated with high cholesterol? What, what are the numbers showing biochemically or proteomically in the in the blood chemistry? And what intervention will be best for you if there is a needed intervention? Right? Because this is where medicine comes into play because, you know, we could do all the the, you know, all the lifestyle things and dietary recommendations. But for some people that have these genetic predispositions, it it they need, you know, that that inner aggressive intervention. You know? And how do we personalize it to you? And then there's a set of guidelines for it. And I think right now, we need to look at it further and refine it further based on this n of one narrative. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. I guess the challenge is that, you know, there's not enough doctors or not enough time to, to to dedicate that much time to every individual. So I guess that's where, like, maybe AI in the future can help to, like, accelerate this process of understanding these genetics and these other multi omics aspects of every individual. But, I would imagine that with the current system and the way it's set up right now that you have, like, a certain time slot for the doctor and, you know, you see the doctor every, you know, few months or something, that probably is not enough resources for, for, you know, all all, people, especially, like, in United States or something, whereas there's, like, 300,000,000 people? Yeah. Our our system's definitely not structured to accommodate this type of, you know, practice of medicine as yet. We're seeing some early adoption amongst some of the academic centers. Like, University of Pittsburgh has their Institute for Precision Medicine moving into their family medicine program. So they're actually leveraging pharmacogenomics and its individualized, implementation in their practice. University of Maryland also has a system there. So we're starting to see the early adoption right now within the academic centers, Mayo Clinic as well, you know, really pioneering some of this, individualized kind of approaches. But, again, still a very reactionary model, you know, because at the heart of, I I would say, precision medicine is, the what's called the p four medicine framework, which was coined by doctor Leroy Hood from the Institute of Systems Biology and Phenome Health. And, you know, p four medicine basically stands for personalized preventative, predictive, and participatory based medicine. And if we have, you know, the ability to make informed decisions, based on the personalization, the predictability, and the preventative nature, you know, we could theoretically augment some of, the disease processes here, you know, using that that kind of framework and model, which has led me to, kind of, form the, a collaborative initiative, in in you know, with changing and adopting this this p four medicine precision model in health care. So I am the founder and president of the American Board of Precision Medicine. And, we have faculty from all over the country and world that are contributing to our, you know, basically, our educational system here to develop the framework for precision medicine so that it could be adopted. You know? And our goals are not only to get this in front frontline clinical practice, but more so to lead industry and policy change so that we could get this adopted here, you know, sooner so that, you know, people, not only in The US, but around the world, could start thinking along these lines about, you know, health care as a whole. Yeah. And but in the meanwhile, people can really check out your book, which, was a fascinating read that I enjoyed myself as well. And, yeah, we can maybe pivot to the book so so that has, like, a lot more practical information for the listener. So, the longevity equation, you know, how would you define it, yourself? So, you know, I it's interesting. So the longevity equation is kind of a, again, a manifestation of all my efforts over the years, pulling it into what I'm doing here clinically. And, basically, it's, you know, a framework that is grounded in, precision medicine, multiomics, you know, starting off with, you know, this this concept of multiomic analysis where you we need to dive into the quantified self with deep molecular phenotyping to understand what I call your biological baseline is. Once we know what our baseline is, are we aging at a rapid pace? Are you know, are there, you know, environmental toxicants that are accumulating in our system based on our exposome? Do we have these genetic vulnerabilities? Right? Once we get that collective kind of, you know, baseline, we could use that towards guiding intervention and personalizing medicine. And, additionally, within the book, I infuse this, analogy of what we call a biological four zero one k. And in The US, we have, you know, what's called a four zero one k system that we invest into for our retirement. Right? And that analogy is that we basically have our internal health savings account for which we're making daily deposits and withdrawals from in forms of our biological four zero one k. Right? We know what all the deposits are, all the fun things, all the good things. You know, diet, exercise, sleep, nutrition, meaning and purpose, healthy relationships, and so forth. And, we know what the deposits are. You know? Sleep deprivation and eating poorly and not exercising and not getting movement in, toxic relationships, toxic environment, all those things deduce from our health savings account. Right? And could be kind of clinically measured based on different biomarkers of aging, you know, on a epigenetic level or a proteomic level like with, pheno age calculation. And, basically, we have the ability to make meaningful deposits in our biological four zero one k with all the fun different bio, biohacking technology that's out there. You know, ozone therapy, EBU, looking at therapeutic plasma exchange, having access to hyperbaric oxygen therapy, you know, IV therapies, and and so forth. And we could leverage a very targeted, scalable system to make those meaningful investments into your biological four zero one k so that, ultimately, your return on investment will be basically an increased health span over a lifespan and that we're, you know, kind of fixing what is called our quality adjusted life years, our QALY, and, you know, which is basically the years that we live unencumbered by any disease or dysfunction and that we're living to our fullest potential without, you know, the debilitating factors of any disease process. And, again, that's also grounded in the molecular framework of identifying the mechanisms of aging. So, you know, looking at things through the multiomic lens in conjunction with the hallmarks of aging is gonna give us kind of this, you know, computational analysis of how we could augment the the biological aging process as a whole. Mhmm. Right. Yeah. That's a good analogy that, you have your savings and deposit and things that, withdraw from there. And I think it makes sense that Allah's will intuitively, like, what things would be detrimental to that and what would be more beneficial. This episode is brought to you by Bone Charge, my favorite company for blue blocking glasses, red light therapy devices, and red light light bulbs. These items are essential for keeping your sleep wakefulness cycles aligned in a world that tries to mess them up. Instead of looking at your phone before bed and letting the blue light disrupt your melatonin production, why not wear blue blockers instead that prevent that from happening? Instead of having your bedroom lit up with bright lights, use the more sleep friendly alternative by opting for flicker free red light light bulbs that don't disrupt your sleep. Boncharge also has amazing infrared sauna blankets that can give you the same health benefits as the traditional sauna. You also get the unique benefits of infrared light that improves joint and skin health. Head over to boncharge.com/seamlund and use the code seam, s I I m, for a 15% discount. So what does the process look like for, like, a new client? How do they begin, when they, like, join, the the practice of someone who does a precision medicine? Yeah. You know, I think a lot of it is gonna require, pre education. Right? It's not your standard physician office where you come in here. There's a lot of different kind of steps that takes place with, understanding our kind of advanced translational process of connecting the molecular dots. And, so, you know, when somebody comes to me, generally speaking, I kinda make it clear. Hey. I'm not necessarily trying to become your your physician, like, you know, your primary care physician, even though I'm trained in primary care. But the fact that I'm out of network, out of insurance, I still want you to keep your conventional PCP. My goal is to become your health educational partner. Right? Or you know? And, basically, as we partner up and we decode and reverse engineer your compositional construct using that multi omic analysis, we're able to paint that baseline again. So when when people come to me, I'm I'm running a multitude of different advanced diagnostic testing, including advanced imaging techniques of full body MRIs and AI generated, kind of, coronary, angiograms to make sure that, we're quantifying plaque in the arteries. We're looking at, you know, the compositional analysis of the using the full body MRI, and we're kind of using the advanced multi omic analysis to get a better appreciation of their their their baseline. And then from there, you know, we could do a a deep dive and just review the data and information. And if you're young and otherwise healthy, honestly, there's not much to do. Right? So if you're remotely health conscious, it's gonna be you know, this is where you get into the biohacking. And, you know, if you have very specific health goals or in with increasing VO two max or your performance, that's where we have longevity, gym, you know, which is, another side of the practice where it's like, you know, again, my office is this office right now is right next to my jiu jitsu school. So on the other side of the wall is jiu jitsu. So all my guys, they come in, and they're, you know, running to that hyperbaric oxygen chamber, full body photobiomodulation. We've got IVs. We have contrast therapy, sauna, and cold plunge and cryo, and all these things to help maximize performance. So generally speaking, it just depends on the individual. But, you know, you know, as I pivoted away from chronic complex illness, which was, you know, what I was working in for many years, and more focused on, this kind of, longevity forward narrative, it's it's been very interesting. So, essentially, you come in, you get this baseline. We have this information. Your DNA doesn't change, but your biological aging process does. Your microbiome changes on a regular basis as well, as well as your proteomic and metabolomic profiles. So we get this information, and we're able to to leverage it to make informed decisions about the refinement of your health. Right? And oftentimes, yeah, we'll find some you know, you know, if you you look hard enough, you might find, you know, unfortunately, some of these chronic infectious issues. You might find some environmental factors like, you know, microplastics accumulating in the system as well as, like, glyphosate and organophosphates, heavy metals, and so forth. And we need to go in and make sure we identify the source of those exposures, and we have different circuits that we built out here to help with the, biotransformative process of, elimination of these different factors, AKA detox. I don't like to use the term detox. I think it has a negative connotation, depending on who you speak to. But I feel as though that, you know, it's it's a part of the the healing and cleansing process. But, you know, again, if you're speaking to an MD and you say the term detox, they're gonna think, oh, it's quackery. But, the reality is we we do bioaccumulate these different forms of environmental exposures and stored in our tissues. And if you were to look at the German model of homotoxicology with, Hans Rekowig that looked at, this progressive vicariation as he called it. As we accumulate these different toxins, it could lead to ultimately, autoimmunity and cancer, right, as it accumulates and deposits and impregnates our tissues and our systems affecting our ability to, to repair. So and that that ties into the narrative of, antiaging medicine, longevity based medicine. Once we have these, exposures outpacing our ability to repair, that's when damage accumulates. And that accumulated damage is what drives, you know, the genetic instability, which is hallmark number one of, you know, the hallmarks of aging. Right? So, you know, basically, you know, like I said, multiomic analysis, and then we use all the advanced physical exam stuff, like I said, even, quantitative, electroencephalograms, v o two max testing, and everything else in between, to basically custom curate your individualized protocol based on a very specific targeted therapeutic order, prioritization and symptomatic manifestation of what the the medical intake shows. Right. So, yeah, like, you need to establish, like, a baseline first of, their health with, like, some blood tests, their fitness, their body composition, their, heavy metal levels, so, like, their toxic toxicity levels, and, those kind of things? Correct. Right. Are there ways, like, to actually, what do you think? Like, other ways to, like, remove those, let's say, microplastics and the different toxins, different domains about it? It's very interesting, and I think, you know, there there are ways to do that. And, this year, 2024 in Orlando at the ozone conference, you know, there was a a publication on what was, kind of, you know, measured or collected in the EBU filtrate. So for those that aren't familiar with EBU, it's extracorporeal blood ozonation oxygenation. What does that mean? Well, it's a technique that's, basically kind of pioneered in Europe that's, you know, kind of making its way here throughout The US. Unfortunately, it's not a FDA approved technology, but, you know, again, there's a lot of science and literature to support, you know, these these interventions, some European, some US. But long story short, it's a a method that I use here clinically where, you you, have somebody, you know, with double venous access. We are able to pull the blood out of the system and go through a filter. So once a blood is filtered, it's then ozonated. And ozone increases ozonides, and ozonides are basically, you know, these, reactive oxygen, singlet molecules that go in there and have a hormetic effect on, the body. And it it's been shown to, you know, improve NRF two signaling and activate, AMP kinase, which are very important endogenous, molecular signals for, improving metabolic efficiency and also endogenous antioxidant production. Right? And then once the blood is filtered and then ozonated, it undergoes, what's called UV blood radiation, which is gonna basically, expose the blood to multiple different wavelengths of light that's been shown to have multiple therapeutic applications and benefits. Without making any claims, it has been shown to have some, let's just say, antimicrobial benefits and activity. Additionally, mitochondrial, stimulating properties and, a host of others depending on the wavelength of light in its clinical application. But to put it short, so that's Hibou. And, what you end up collecting is this giant bucket of stuff, right, from the filtrate. And that filtrate's been assessed, and it's been shown to have everything from biofilms to heavy metals to microplastics within that in, tested models. So, you know, the blood filtering process, I think, is a very important component in, you know, let's say, quarterly. You know, I'm doing it to myself quarterly here to try to go in there and remove some of these environmental toxicants that, you know, are just just hidden, unfortunately, in our very toxic world in an environment. And, basically, that's one method of elimination and detox. There are other methods. It depends on the environmental toxicants. You know, heavy metal. Right? You know, there's chelation, whether it's intravenous or oral, you know, gentle chelation. But, again, you don't wanna chelate somebody if there's, leaky gut, you know, because a leaky gut could also translate into leaky brain. In regards to the blood brain barrier system, the same tight junctions and zonulin occludents are that are involved with the tight junctions of our gut are associated with the tight junctions of the blood brain barrier system. So you gotta be careful with, you know, jumping into these different detox methods. One of the things I love to do is actually, you know, certain IV therapies depending on what we find in conjunction with lymphatic compression. We have a machine here from New Zealand called Flopresso. That's a whole body, lymphatic compression. And then, you know, there's other technologies you once you you do the targeted IVs and some of the, you know, the mobilization of, of, the stirring the pot, so to speak, and you do the compression, you know, looking into sauna therapy, you know, ozone sauna and different infrared saunas to help you eliminate and drain some of this. But all of this is very targeted based on what we find in your system because mold exposure, biotoxin exposure is gonna be different than heavy metals, different than microplastics, and, you know, other things that we we see here, organophosphates and so forth. Right? So, you know, the the targeted detox protocol is very individualized based on, again, these these report of findings. Right. Gotcha. So you you can test, yeah, like heavy metals. You can I I guess you can also test microplastics? Are there is, like, a few biomarkers that can reflect, bio microplastic, levels as well? Are there any, like, specific ones that you prioritize more when it comes to microplastics, for example, the biomarkers? No. Just, you know, the bisphenols. Right? There's, different panels for the different bisphenol breakdown that you could order just if we get a sick. And the thing is, it's like, how do you cast that net to scratch the surface to see if there is a signature there? And then sometimes once you cast that net, you know, you could dive a little bit deeper into more targeted testing based on the initial reported findings. Right? So it just depends on the clinical scenario and what we're targeting. Gotcha. Yeah. I also was researching about, the microplastics, just recently, and, yeah, the UV light appears to, yeah, like, degrade some of these microplastics. But, yeah, the thing is the UV light from the sun can't penetrate into your blood, so it can't get through the skin. So how do you actually, like, send UV light into the blood to degrade the microplastics there? So one of the ways, yeah, like, take the blood out, shoot the UV light into the blood, and then put the blood back in. And then that's the EEBO process, basically how it looks like. And And there's another, technology out of Germany with the Weber instruments that does intravenous, you know, kinda laser technology as well. I don't have that on my, in the offices yet, but it's on the wish list here soon. Probably, this year, I'm gonna be getting tech for for the office, but that's a whole another tech. So the client that you started working with, they have gotten their baseline tests. They have done some blood tests, some heavy metal tests, etcetera. There might be some things that they need to start, like a detox protocol, etcetera. But what does it look like, let's say, routinely? Like, are there some things that beyond the initial baseline, some things that need to be assessed, like, routinely for the sake of, like, longevity? Like, how frequently should they do, like, a blood test? How frequently should they do, like, a DXA scan or some BRTmax test, whatever the test, is? It it's just, again, highly based on a few different things in terms of resources and, you know, what we're identifying, which will dedicate, you know, or delegate what we we move forward with with, routine screening and, follow-up. I think the ultimate goal is to, you know, have a whole body health optimization approach to things. I know in the longevity space, you know, everybody's jumping on hormones. Right? And I think oftentimes, especially for men, you know, it's gonna be very important to kind of not have a a knee jerk reflex to go in there and start a man on TRT because arguably, you know, for some individuals, we have the ability to, augment, testosterone production naturally with their appropriate biohacking technologies. Right? So that you're not based with being on a medication for the rest of your life, you know, with testosterone replacement. So, you know, optimizing hormones is a very big piece of this. You know? If there's, you know, somebody that's traveled the world and has gone camping and they're you know, has had food poisoning and and they're been suffering with gut issues, that's another area of that I see very routinely that needs to be addressed. And, unfortunately, individuals that are exposed to chronic molds in their environment or other forms of chronic infectious issues, Lyme disease and coinfections is also something that needs to be addressed and has its own cadence of testing and intervention depending on, you know, their their what they're grappling with. So putting all that together, you know, is there's a gonna be a very specific specific therapeutic order, again, based on the information or report of findings. But in when strictly longevity, young otherwise healthy individual like yourself, where it's just like, hey. I'm just trying to biohack and live my life to the fullest and, everything else, where there's really probably no major issues below the surface here. You know? You've been dialed in. I would say taking things up to the next level will be exploring these different regenerative modalities. One of the things that, we're exploring here, are the different forms of stem cells. Right? So I I am a board certified stem cell physician and, with the American Academy of Stem Cell Physicians here in The US. And, you know, it's a very interesting conversation and also a polarizing conversation regarding, like, people's understanding of it. So when when somebody says stem cells, they're like, oh, you're killing babies and, you're, you know, you're you're taking the fetal stem cells and all this. No. That's not the case. Right? The the the evolution of stem cell medicine is is far evolved from the original narrative back in the, you know, '2 nineties and February and where we're at today. And there are different methods and different forms of stem cells that are available out there. And, you know, basically, in the book, we speak about, you know, the difference between autologous and allogeneic stem cells and their their potential. And I think, you know, personally, if it were me, I I would like to stay with autologous stem cells, you know, self you know, derived from self because there might be still some uncertainties with long term, you know, donor cell tissue, and what that would look like, potentially down the road with, the potential for teratogenic effects. Teratogenic, basically, you know, these these stem cells have what's called pluripotential, which it means it could go into and develop into other tissues. And, you know, for some, you know, there are some isolated, incidences where, you know, getting stem cells from donor tissue has led to teratogenicity. Right? Not a good thing. Right? So I like to stick with the the narrative of autologous stem cells. And, you know, unfortunately, all those clinics that you see overseas that a lot of people are going to are, you know, using donor tissue from, you know, placenta and, embryonic stem cells. And it's not to take away from it. It does have its therapeutic benefit. And if you're okay with donor tissue, by all means, go for it. Right? But in my opinion, I philosophically, I'd rather stick with self tissue. Now the argument is, you know, there's this, one of the hallmarks of aging. Historically, it was like the ninth, hallmark of aging, which is the concept of stem cell exhaustion. Right? So as we age and we accumulate damage, the stem cells start, kind of puttering out and losing its potential for regeneration. And, there was a Nobel Prize winner, I believe, in what was it? Twenty fourteen, twenty sixteen, doctor Yamanaka that basically identified that there are these Yamanaka factors that are involved with, the rejuvenation of stem cells. Simply put, there are these OSKM factors that have been identified as transcription factors that suppress stem cell activity that that become expressed with time and damage. And what Yamanaka found is that, basically, if you suppress the suppressor, you have the ability to rejuvenate stem cells and activity. And, you know, again, this is there's no right answer to what I'm saying, but I do think before we move into that kind of phase of regenerative medicine and your longevity journey that you have to do the homework with cleaning up the terrain or the microenvironment and preparing the environment for this regenerative therapy with the detox methods and so forth. And I'm sure, you know, your audience is very knowledgeable and has seen the research of doctor Efraadi out of Israel looking at hyperbaric oxygen therapy and its effect on mobilizing hematopoietic stem cells into circulation based on his, his his protocol. So there's different technologies that we could do to prepare this the terrain and and make the soil fertile so that the implantation of these different regenerative signals, whether it's exosomes, stem cells, v cells, or whatever, could have the appropriate, you know, microenvironment for growth and proliferation and regeneration as a whole. So, again, you know, as you move forward in your longevity journey, you wanna make sure that you're prioritizing the right things. You know? You being an athlete, you wanna make sure that, you're there's no wear and tear to your joints and that you're doing, you know, the right things to keep it rejuvenated. So certain people like to do kind of, whole body, kind of touch ups, so to speak, on stem cells to help with the rejuvenation process. And there's a a movie that just came out, recently on biohacking yourself that explored the role of what's called v cell technology, very small embryonic like stem cells. And that's a technique that we do here in the office, which is, basically have the ability to harvest these, very small embryonic like stem cells from your your blood and, kind of refine it and and deliver it systemically. And the difference between, you know, these cells and some of the mesenchymal stem cells besides the transcription factors is the size. Right? The mesenchymal stem cells are a little bit larger. And if you try to push it peripherally in IV push, it, will get basically stuck in the pulmonary vasculature and the small capillaries. It won't have the ability to migrate systemically versus these very small embryonic like stem cells can migrate through the very small capillaries and, land where they need to land. And there's other laser technologies that are out there and developed and that are being used to kind of guide and hone where the stem cells need to be delivered. So, again, there's there's multiple different techniques out there, not to mention exosomes and these basically extracellular vesicles that help with the, intercellular communication of promoting a rejuvenating, environment for for stem cell applications. So, yeah, there's it's a whole another phase of, you know, the kind of where we move into. Mhmm. Yeah. I guess one one thing we could discuss is, like, although you don't have to be very precise about it, but, you know, yes, I'm generally healthy. I don't have any, like, health concerns. I do have, like, one genetic risk, I guess. So my grandfather, he died to colorectal cancer when he was, like, 36, back in the eighties, before I was born. So I guess that is one of the potential risks that I have. So what what would be like, okay, someone who has some family history of a particular chronic disease, like me in the example of, colon cancer, other ways to, like, preemptively, like, okay, try to diagnose or preemptively try to, like, catch it or if there is any risk? So, yeah, again, you know, in The US, we have what's, called the USPSTF, United States screening and protective task force that have a set of guidelines specifically for colon cancer. It's one of the five main cancers that's recommended, you know, to have very specific targeted aggressive screening for. Lung cancer, breast cancer, cervical cancer, colon cancer, and prostate cancer are the top five here in The US that that, you know, there's really specific guidelines for. So with that being said, you know, when there's a first degree, relative that had early onset, colon cancer, you know, there's very, aggressive screening guidelines starting, you know, at a very specific age based on the the findings of that individual. Now from a biohacking perspective or maybe a integrative perspective where you're you wanna be a little bit more aggressive with screening for this, you know, There are biomarkers that, again, this isn't routinely suggested, you know, like a CEA, which is a biomarker for colon cancer, you know, that could be Yeah. Infused into a routine kind of screening test. There's also in The US here, we have a, stool based analysis, DNA analysis that's called Cologuard, that's not as invasive as a colonoscopy that could be used to screen for, colon cancer. Also, you know, there's some research that's looked at a dis a perturbed microbiome and a overgrowth of what's called strep bovis, streptococcus bovis being associated with colon cancer. Also, there's, you know, a lack of bifidobacteria has been also shown to create a microenvironment conducive towards that toxic colon. So, again, from a microbiome to a proteomic to a genetic factor, right, there are other gene clusters and polygenic risk scores that could be associated with colon cancer that you would wanna look into. Right? There's something called Lynch syndrome, you know, that, is very specific with aggressive early onset colon cancer. But, again, that's a very specific and targeted clinical diagnosis. Right? It just it it all depends. Right? And the thing is, one of the biomarkers that I like to utilize, clinically is eight hydroxydeoxyguanosine, right, eight OHCG, right, which is a biomarker of genetic instability. Is this gonna pick up every single perturbed cell that has some level of, you know, impaired DNA function? No. But it's still a good marker to say, hey. If this is creeping up, we need to be on guard and and be a little bit more aggressive with our screening guidelines. And for my patients that are usually above the age of depending on their background, but usually on average above the age of 50, right, that's when I start seeing that eight o h d g starting to bump up. And then other individuals that maybe have lived a very aggressive lifestyle historically and are a bit younger, they could also have some of those markers kind of surfacing. And and it needs to flag us in, you know, hey. How aggressive do you wanna be with this? You know? Because sometimes there are people that are like, ignorance is bliss. I don't I don't care. Yeah. You know? You and I are a little bit more health conscious comparatively. Right? And but there's a whole other demographic of individuals that just don't prioritize self care and don't wanna know. Right? So it's very interesting when you get into clinical practice how, everybody has their own threshold and desire of aggressive diagnostics and interventions depending on who they are and where they're at and their family history. Right? Yeah. So Yeah. I hope that answered your question. Yeah. Yeah. For sure. Like, yeah, like, a lot of these, blood markers specifically for certain chronic diseases, they're not, like, in the standard blood panel at at the doctors. And you need to be just aware. You you know, like, most people don't even they're not even aware of these blood markers or like even like Alzheimer's. They now even see some blood markers are predictive of Alzheimer's risk in the future. So, yeah, it's more like a lack of, like, I guess, education about it, unfortunately. But for me, like, I'm probably gonna do, like, a colonoscopy at some point just in case. But, I've done a full body MRI that was clear, and I also did, like, this, occult, stool occult blood stool test. So it looks like there's invisible blood in the stool, and that came back also, like, normal. Although it was, like, on the higher end of normal. So maybe I need to do a colonoscopy at some point, just to be in case. Yeah. You know, the cold, blood is not really that sensitive. You know? You could have an internal or extender hemorrhoid. You could even have a upper GI leak, you know, from, an ulcer that could lead to that being, positive. So, you know, it's not the most sensitive marker, unfortunately, for it. And when it comes down to colon health, I think that's the the classic example looking at the terrain in that ecosystem of the colon and what that really means. Because, you know, they're as you know, the colonocytes, you know, feed off these short chain fatty acids to produce that initial, detent defensive bilayer known as the mucin mucin layer. And, you know, there's a very specific ecosystem of large intestinal microflora versus small intestinal microflora. Right? And, there are all these other markers that I think are very important to look at to look at whether or not there's inflammation taking place, you know, deep within the colon, if there's immune mediated inflammatory issues as well. And, so when when unpacking the terrain of the digestive system, you know, it starts with like, hey. You know, do we have enough stomach acid? Is are there any symptoms of GERD or, you know, dyspepsia, which, you know, could be indicative of you know, dyspepsia, which, you know, could be indicative of, you know, some sort of h pylori? You know? Is there gas, bloating, constipation, distension, even postprandial fatigue? Is that more, you know, a manifestation of SIBO, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth? Are there signs of IBS, right, where you go to your GI doctor and you've been scoped up and down, left and right, inside out, and they were like, oh, we don't know. So you got IBS. You know, you meet the Rome, three, four criteria of, you know, this diagnosis of exclusion. But what we're now finding is that IBS is actually an autoimmune process characterized by, you know, these anti viniculin and CDT B antibodies based on the work of, Doctor Pimentel at Cedars Sinai. So, you know, there's a lot of different ways of unpacking the digestive system there. Right? So from IBS to IBD, you know, is there a genetic predisposition towards ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, and what does that really mean? And using, like, fecal calprotectin as a marker to identify, do we have this inflammatory, process taking place? And are certain foods causing, you know, inflammation within the digestive system very specifically. Right? So, you know, food allergy and sensitivity, could play a role in that as well. Yeah. Fortunate, I don't have any gut problems or digestive problems at all. Like, I'm probably, like, the most resilient eater that I know. Like, I can eat, like, anything, can eat any amounts, and, yeah, like, no problem with that, fortunately. And and even even, like, I was living in a molded house for, like, over two decades, and I had no symptoms or any problems with it at all. But my wife went my wife moved in there and she, like, immediately within a few weeks started getting, like, the tonsil inflammation and symptoms and stuff. She's, like, the opposite. She's, like, super sensitive to, like, different foods and she has, like, more autoimmune issues, whereas I don't, and kind of very interesting contrast there. Yeah. No. And I I think that speaks to the the HLA haplotypes associated with those environmental tox sensitivities. Right? So certain individuals possess, unfortunately, genetic predispositions that make them a little bit more hypersensitive to the environment and turn on a part of their immune system that doesn't have the ability to turn off specifically when exposed to these different biotoxins. So Yeah. She's Sorry to hear that. I hope she's doing well. No. Yeah. Well, like, I mean, we're not living there anymore, and she's doing great. But, you know, she's been exploring, like, the idea of, stem cells maybe helping with, autoimmunity. Like, have you seen any research about that? Stem cells, not specifically for the, you know, for autoimmunity. You know, there is anecdotal research amongst my small community of physicians doing some of these therapies that we're doing collectively around autoimmunity and EBOOX. So the blood filtration is actually, you know, again, I I I gotta be careful with making any medical claims or proclaiming this treatment for an ICD 10, indication. But let's just say that there's some immunological benefits for autoimmunity and some of those modalities that discussed. Right? Mhmm. So, again, you know, just without research and publications to support it, I I don't like to make claims, you know, especially on a public forum here just because, you know, I very, very held to a different standard of, you know, amongst, my peers and everything else. But I will say, anecdotally speaking, that, there is some signature of benefit with, you know, those, systems, EBU, ozone, and so forth, and autoimmunity specifically. Mhmm. Yeah. Because historically, I think they were used for some blood disorders and, like, viral infections. Right? Yeah. Yeah. And, honestly, I I when you start looking at, what some of these what some of these, the stem cells could trigger and then after, you know, infused, you know, TNF alpha goes up tremendously. Tumor necrosis factor alpha, which is actually kind of a healing signaling molecule. So, you know, a lot of, autoimmunity Well, what is autoimmunity? It's misprogramming, miscommunication. Right? And even if you were to take it to the German new medicine model based on the work of doctor Hamer, right, you know, there there could be even a psycho emotional traumatic event associated with that. And based on the events, you know, there's different parts of the brain that he's demonstrated to have MRI kind of, consistent, targets, within the brain based on that trauma and that germ layer manifestation, the tissue specific, association with it. But, again, there could be a a traumatic or a lifestyle factor associated. It could be environmental or infectious disease, component to it where, you know, there's, some studies looking at these different viruses, including Epstein Barr virus and its association with some of these different autoimmune processes. Mayo Clinic had published, you know, EBV and its association with multiple sclerosis as well. You know? So, there there are multiple different factors when unpacking why, you know, some of these pro these processes take place. And do I think, yes, you know, regenerative medicine has a a a role in it? Absolutely. But you gotta do the gardening first. You know? We gotta you know, we could see the body from two perspectives. You know? The the biomechanical perspective where the body is a machine, and we have the ability to replace a part and pull something out. And, it's very mechanistic, versus the body is a garden. Right? This is a very old school, you know, traditional Chinese medicine perspective where, you know, the doctor is plays gardener, you know, and goes in there and and helps, you know, just just do the appropriate, you know, kind of, ecological cleanup in this micro ecosystem of, of our body. You know? So I like to blend the two together and see, you know, what's going on. And a technique that, I don't that I use for research, purposes only is using the dark field face contrast microscopy to take a picture, into what's going on within the terrain of the body. It's a technique that I got into when I was a teenager and started analyzing everybody's blood, and it led me to study a lot of the European biological medical modalities. You know? Mhmm. And also pursue, my studies in, molecular microbiology and medical laboratory science. So I'm I'm a I'm a huge nerd, man. I love nerding out on stuff. So yeah. Yeah. For sure. We can, yeah, like, have a massive podcast about all the aspects of this precision medicine and and, longevity. So it's gonna take, you know, you know, entire weeks to go through all of that material. But, we could also talk about maybe heart disease because that's by far the biggest, you know, killer for most people. And, how do you, like, yeah, approach someone's heart disease risk so this is more like a preventive manner? So they don't have any general lifestyle or even like blood marker risk factors, but they do have, let's say, genetic family history. How would you like approach it in that situation as a preventive tool overall? Yeah. I think that's a great question. And especially for me personally, I'm I'm if my name and, you know, skin tone didn't give it away, I'm Indian, really Indian. And Indians are really prone to cardiometabolic issues, you know, diabetes and heart disease specifically. And, I specifically have, you know, these polygenic risk scores associated with, with heart disease. So it's something I've been grappling with here very specifically. And, you know, so to shift focus away from myself, what I I do here typically, clinically is I wanna know your baseline. Number one, I'm gonna take that deep dive into, you know, some of the genetic factors, what CTEP and, APL b, APL l p little a, you know, and other polygenic risk scores associated with dyslipidemia or high cholesterol. Right? So we start off with your DNA blueprint to understand, you know, what kind of, you know, genetic predispositions you have. Number two, I run advanced lipid profiles, you know, to get a better appreciation of, you know, the fractionation particles and the other lipoproteins that could be associated with, other manifestations. Like, for example, TMAO is a a marker of, cardiac inflammation derived from dysbiosis in the guts and eating certain types of foods. L p little a is an independent risk factor alone that's genetically so I I like to take that deep dive in the genomics and then the biomarkers. I like to do the imaging at least at minimum with a coronary artery calcium score and or a CTA or corn, you know, which is CT angiogram of the heart to get a better appreciation if there's additional risk there. So if somebody's, you know, kinda doesn't have the family history, doesn't have, you know, these factors, we don't need imaging. Right? I won't I won't move with imaging. But at a certain point in time, you know, it's it's still good to at least get a coronary artery calcium score. And I know, you know, with the USPSTF, they have that as a two way preventative screening guideline, which is good. But, again, it's not covered by insurance. So, you know, that that test costs a $100 out of pocket to just get that amount of a calcified plaque burden within the, vascular system. And, you know, to me, that that tells a lot. Right? But it doesn't tell the full story. And the difference between an angiogram and a CAC or coronary artery calcium score is, you know, the soft and unstable plaque accumulation that we need to be looking at. And that could be, you know, further, you know, identified with those, you know, f two isoprostanes and LPPLA two and other biomarkers that are associated with, the plaque dynamics in the the the system. Then, you know, from a kind of metabolomic perspective, you would wanna look to see if somebody's, you know, their fatty acid membrane compositional analysis to see, you know, what kind of fats are there. You know? Do we have a lot of saturated fat and their membranes are really hard? Right? And we don't have enough PUFAs and their omega three index is suboptimal. Right? The reference rate for omega three index is 5.4 in The US. I like to see it around 6.4, but I don't slam people on omega three fatty acids due to, you know, you would wanna look at the redox potential, right, which is basically the antioxidant status. And if you're, like, in an oxidized state and you throw PUFAs or polyunsaturated fatty acids at someone, that's gonna exacerbate the lipid peroxidation and the malondialdehyde that will accelerate the atherosclerosis. Right? So there's a lot of different things that you could do, to make sure you're, again, cleaning up the terrain. So I'd like to look at, you know, some of those additional markers to help augment the fatty acid composition. And, you know, obviously, cutting out seed oils. Right? That stuff's bad. Right? Needless to say. Yeah. It's everywhere. So, you know, there's a lot of things that we could do to refine the system, right, to make sure that we're moving in the right direction for, you know, primary, primordial to secondary prevention of heart disease. So quantification to the personalization and targeted interventions based on that. And if you're to ask me, I'm not anti statin at all. Right? I do think, statins have their role in in in everything. Are people overstatinized? Yes. The number needed to treat is one in, you know, in a hundred plus, you know, based on the drug, and not everybody's gonna have that same therapeutic benefit. But you can't deny the JUPITER trial looking at rosuvastatin and its anti inflammatory and cardiovascular risk preventing benefits. So, again, I'm not anti statin, but I'm not, you know, anti drug or medication because, again, people people need it, man. You know? And I'm not a LDL denier, but I do think there's more to the equation when it comes down to the vascular biology and looking at, you know, even oxalic acid, right, and these uric acid being very damaging to the endothelium. Microscopically, you should see that stuff. You know? There are these giant, you know, rhomboid crystals and, you know, these, like, uric acid microscopically just looks like brown clusters with sharp jagged edges. And that damages, you know, the microendothelial, you know, endothelium. You know, it damages the glycocalyx, right, which is, you know, that layer of, little hair likes, you know, projections from the endothelium that could lead is a first, you know, site of injury leading to atherosclerosis, right, in that whole process of, you know, hardening of the arteries. So I could get into it. I'm sorry. I I I have fun with this stuff if you can't tell. So, you know, that's one way of approaching it for me clinically. Mhmm. Yeah. You know, I guess the issue is that, you know, people might think that they're fine, that, you know, they're not overweight. They they don't have high blood pressure, they don't have diabetes, they don't have, you know, let's say, very bad blood markers and they think they're generally fine. But, you know, they might not measure some of these other blood markers that you mentioned that, you know, they're again, the problem of education that they're not, they don't even, aren't aware that these blood markers are also risk factors for heart disease, like this low plaque progression over time. And yeah, like heart disease is a disease of decades. You're not gonna see massive changes even within, you know, months or years. It's gonna be, yeah, like a matter of decades. Correct. And, you know, and this just reminds me of, I I believe, the research of doctor James O'Keefe. O'Keefe is the last name that I think James O'Keefe, I think. Yeah. Yeah. That that, basically was looking at athletes. Right? And these ultra thought ultra marathon runners, you know, kind of, basically developing accelerated heart disease. Right? You know, otherwise, healthy individuals perceived to be healthy. But that sheer stress against the vascular endothelium, you know, is a real thing. Right? They could have really great heart rates and nice blood pressure and everything else, but that, again, microangiopathic stress is is there. You know? It's causing endothelial dysfunction. So, you know, in the office here, we look at arterial plethysmography to get a good, like, index of, you know, how rigid those capillaries are and the the, you know, the the the pressure and, the resistance and, you know, elasticity of some of the capillaries. And that could gauge, you know, a couple of things. And, you know, obviously, you would wanna do nutrition, diet, and lifestyle first, you know, to get somebody kind of optimized. And if there unfortunately, there are people that just don't respond. Right? Mhmm. Yeah. What do you do? Do you ignore the blood pressure? Do you ignore the cholesterol? No. As a physician, you have to address it clinically, because that's the duty. You know? And we Yeah. Should jump to drugs first or nutraceuticals while you're trying to do it naturally. I'd try a nutraceutical based approach, diet and lifestyle, because that is the standard of care, diet, exercise, lifestyle. First, you know, to see if we could augment this with correcting, you know, the nutrition and everything else. And if we can't, then we need to explore other interventions. You know? But you will get that fighting chance to prove that you could, get this under control through natural means first and foremost. Yeah. Yeah. I agree that, you know, sometimes, doctors might overprescribe, medications, but at the same time, I'm also not against, like, any medications like you that, you know, people, they work for sure. Like, they work in their their targets. Like, you know, statins lower LDL, blood pressure medications lower blood pressure, diabetes medications lower blood sugar, etcetera. So it's like in the short term, it's actually, you know, to to avoid the progression of the damage, essentially, like, to avoid the worsening of the disease, you kind of need to put a hold to it as fast as possible. And, like, yeah, lifestyle and diet and the nutraceuticals and sleep and those things are fundamental, but they take a longer time for your body to like heal. Like you're not going to fix your blood pressure with just diet and exercise overnight. It's gonna take, you know, you need to lose the weight. That's gonna take a few weeks, months, even years for some people. So depends a lot on the person. Like, if they're super overweight and super obese and, they have very high blood blood sugar and high blood pressure, then the kind of medication is just the quick fix that, I guess, is healthier in the over over the long term, and maybe then you kinda wean off eventually. Yeah. Correct. Get somebody medically optimized because, you know, if they're walking around with, you know, hypertensive urgency, emergency, you don't ignore that. You have to initiate therapy. Right? It's, you have to. If not, you know, it could lead to some really bad things. Right? And, so once they're medically optimized, you need to work on, you know, basically the all the other things, to to get them off of it. And the goal would do not, you know, escalate therapy, but deescalate therapy. But they have to be, you know, optimized first medically, and then you could, you know, do some of the homework, you know, as you said. What about, like, neurodegeneration? So this also has pretty huge genetic component and, lifestyle and environmental component as well. So how would you approach, minimizing the risk of, Alzheimer's and dementia? Oh, man. I think that's one of the the best examples. And I think cardiovascular, we just kind of gave a translational precision approach to what that would look like clinically. Additionally, I think neurodegeneration take Alzheimer's, right, as you're alluding to, there's multiple different genes associated with cognitive decline with the bulk of the research being around APOE four, you know, heterohomozygosity, which is a a gene that influences the accumulation of, you know, fatty acids within the neuron that basically, you know, leads to some of these, beta amyloid and and so forth depositions. Now is amyloid the, you know, the end all be all to Alzheimer's? No. I think, you know, if you were to look at the research of doctor Dale Bredesen and the Bredesen protocol, it's it's clearly multifactorial, and there's multiple different endpoints. But for me, clinically, I definitely wanna know, is there, you know, these, a a strong family history towards neurodegeneration? Is there, you know, polygenic risk score or APOE status associated with that, genetic predisposition? And then proteomically, you know, I run additional biomarkers, including plasmalogen levels. I look at beta forty two forty ratios and tau tango, markers in the blood on a proteomic level. And then metabolomically, you could identify perturbations in mitochondria and fatty acid composition and all these other things to identify whether or not they're inching towards neurodegeneration. And then, you know, what do you do about it? Well, there's, you know, there's there's research around, you know, some of the, peptides that are out there, cerebellicin. I I have, some very unique, technologies from Germany called Neuronic. You know, that's transcranial photobiomodulation at ten seventy nanometers. That's been shown to help with, you know, stimulating, the cytochrome c oxidase for mitochondrial to function a little bit better and the neuron to function better. And then there's, you know, different IVs, you know, that have been shown, you know, from phospholipids and and, again, plasmalogen therapies in the work of doctor Goodnow to help support, you know, the the neuronal structure function integrity, making sure that the lifestyle is dialed in, exercise dialed in, lymphatic system is moving, and so forth. So, again, it just depends on where we're at. And then, you know, clinically, I I like to use a a tool that's been validated. It goes beyond, you know, the MOCA score, to determine, you know, different, you know, kind of narrow function, with, reaction times and so forth. I also do brain mapping with, you know, the the QEEG, like I mentioned, to see if there's any areas of dysfunction on the electroencephalogram. And, there's another technology we have here that uses microcurrent neurofeedback to retrain and calibrate the brain to, help stimulate the areas of that are being deficient. So the you know, there's once we know there's this issue, there's a whole arsenal of toys and technologies that we could use to help support the brain and stimulate the the techno you know, the function. Actually, you know, it's funny that you mentioned, you know, on the microbiome round, I just got a package here in the mail. And, you know, one of the things that I use for my patients, here is this test. Oral DNA. Right? So the oral DNA test is, I think, a really interesting, microbiome association. So if you look into the research of trypanemia denticle and its ability to migrate, you know, through the different facial nerves and trigeminal nerve into the brain, it actually causes a localized inflammation within the brain. The cells respond through diapodesis, the white blood cell, by producing hyaluronidase and collagenase that break down the, you know, the the cellular matrix in the connective tissue of the brain, thereby accelerating neurodegeneration to try to get to that trypanemia bacteria. So looking at oral dysbiosis is a very important component to, you know, optimizing, you know, a longevity protocol in preventing neurodegeneration. Yeah. I was gonna ask about, like, how big of a, like, genetic diff like, how how big of an individual response is is it there for, like, some of the fundamentals, like diet and exercise? Like, is it that everyone should have their own individual diet and exercise plan? Or or is it like are there, like, kind of ballparks that, these are the general ranges and ballparks that, everyone should aim for? You know, that's a great question. I think diet alone could be, you know, highly individualized based on various factors. Now, you know, when I was in undergrad, I said studied with doctor Peter D'Adamo, the author of eat right for your blood type and the genotype diet. And I still think from immunohematological perspective that there is the lectin chemistry, which was revisited by, a few other docs here more recently, that that basically kind of repurposed the blood type dieting. And if you were to ask me, I remember when I was an undergrad at, MD Anderson Cancer Center in Orlando, Florida, working in bio, their their their blood banking department and doing transfusion based medicine, for my degree in medical laboratory science. We had to differentiate between a a one, a two phenotype. What what does that mean? It's the same sugar, n n acetyl d, galactosamine, or whatever, glucosamine. And the the difference between a one and a two, they're both blood type a's, but the difference was a double bond within that that that glycoprotein structure on the surface of the red blood cell. And very specifically, we used a bean extract that had a lectin in that bean that binded to that double bond and cause the red blood to also agglutinate. And that always stuck with me that, you know, there is such high avidity and affinity for those double bonds based on the lectin chemistry. Right? And, you know, I think that there's something to be said from an immunohematological perspective with the blood type dieting. Do I think it's a holy grail as professed by D'Adamo that, you know, all those things? I think a little you know, I I think there is something there, but, you know, you know and we should use some of those road maps to differentiate between, you know, the blood types. I think that's a layer for the collaborative filter and the individualization of, you know, nutrition. I think there's additional factors, including metabolic profiling. There's this concept of the metabolic typing diet, you know, proposed by multiple different physicians with doctor Wolcott being one of the lead, publishers in this, with his book, the metabolic typing diet, which also looked into what is described as a five kind of core, homeodynamic control systems that influences a person's, you know, metabolic profile, which included acid alkaline balance. Right? Anabolic catabolic states or anabolic anaerobic, catabolic, dysaerobic. You know, sympathetic versus parasympathetic dominance. Right? So some people you know who's sympathetic dominant. Right? You could just look at them and be like, yeah. You gotta relax. Right? You know, there's, what else is there? There's electrolyte excess and deficient states. Right? And then there's slow versus fast oxidizer status, which has to deal with being glucogenic versus ketogenic in nature. Right? So some people kind of tend to favor one metabolic profile versus another, and there's genes that influence that. So the that combination of those different collaborative filters could influence the the personalization of nutrition. But then when you stack that with a resting metabolic rate test right? Sorry about that. The metabolic rate test is, another test that I think has their you know, it's it's influence in the personalization and nutrition. Right? So, you know, knowing your how your body's triaging energy from food and prioritizing your macros is something. Then there's the nutrigenomic layer of filtering your diet, you know, based eating based on your genetic predisposition. So there are multiple different levels of filtering and the personalization of an ideal optimized diet. In my opinion, it also based on your exercise. Right? So, you know, you're I don't I don't wanna make any claims, but to me, you're built like a bodybuilder. Right? Very muscular, ripped to shreds, you know, and and everything else. So your your your protein, or your macronutrient intake is probably gonna be different than somebody that trains for another kind of sports. Right? Right. Like a UFC fighter, right, where they have to be very, targeted, where they're not trying to put on the muscle. You know, upregulate some more of the fast twitch muscle fibers, right, that are gonna have its, you know, response in combat. So, again, depending on the athlete and who they're at and their physical activity and their goals is gonna influence diet and exercise, simply put, and the type of training and activity, you know, and what zones of activity and what kind of things that you're doing. You know? Yeah. Right. I I've also read, like, the the blood type diet, and maybe I think might have read the metabolic type diet as well. The blood type diet, I have, like, the zero negative. So that's this kind of hunter gatherer blood type that in the book said that more more protein and more fats and stuff like that. I have, like, you know, tried this, you know, low carb ketogenic diet in the past. Maybe a few years ago I was doing it for several years. But nowadays, for the last maybe three years, four years, I've been doing, like, a very high carb, less animal protein diet. And you know, I don't know. Like, at least objectively or sub subjectively, I feel better. I feel my blood markers are also generally better or slightly. So it's kind of interesting that to see this kind of different responses to to the diet. But or maybe it could be just because of my some gen this genetic, you know, resilience to be being able to eat any kinds of foods, like dairy, grains, lectins, all these different foods without any issues. Maybe someone else without that genetic background might react, completely differently. And the thing is you're you're moving. You're an athlete. You know? Mhmm. And I think athletes are gonna respond, favorably when when things get dialed in based on their their exercise and performance. You know? Right. Yeah. So, you know, it's interesting to yeah. And I think, you know, ketogenic is, you know, is is very restrictive medical diet, right, as you know. And, you know, there's a lot of therapeutic and clinical applications for it, especially on the neurodegenerative side. You know? I'm sure you've seen, the work of doctor Perlmutter and others. Perlmutter is a very big advocate for ketogenic dieting, you know, for the prevention of neurodegeneration. So, again, different, you know, different phases and stages of life. You know? I try to stick to just Mediterranean. Me personally, I I typically do, OMAD dieting right now just because of my clinical schedule. Seeing patients all day, and doing a bunch of other things. And, you know, I I basically just have one meal a day. You know, I might break it up with some nuts or a protein shake and, just a a dinner that's, kind of protein forward with healthy, veggies and, you know, everything else there. So and but, again, that's based on my really busy clinical day. So it it also depends on a few other factors. So, again, once you get into the personalization of diet and nutrition, exercise, and sleep, you know, everybody's lifestyle is different. You know, you throw a child into the mix, and my goodness, that disrupts everything. You know? So, yeah, it's just very interesting to see. And you gotta meet people where they're at in their their their lifestyle and their journey. You know? Yeah. And see resonates with them. But what's really interesting is getting the real time feedback to see how it affects your your physiology performance and and biochemistry, you know, because, you know, there's a lot of unexplained, clinical responses that we've seen, you know, that's like, all right, everything on paper should do this, but it didn't go in that direction, you know? So it's just very interesting to see whether it's immunologically, lipidology wise or, or whatever it is. There's all these different factors that could influence, some somebody's, you know, clinical expression. Yeah. Well, as I said earlier, we could have, you know, many hours of, conversation about, these topics. So I guess we can wrap it up for this time and, perhaps do, like, a follow-up in the future. But, before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and your work and your book? Yeah. So we're about to publish the book, The Longevity Equation here, hopefully, for, you know, 2025. You know, we had a soft launch of the book about a year ago, you know, for a conference. But, you know, since then, the book is completely different. You know? There's always new research I'm just trying to cram in there to support this narrative, and I just want it to be the most up to date, version of it. So, the book will be hopefully released here very soon. Again, that's the longevity equation. I have my private practice, the Institute for Human Optimization, ifho.org. You know, that, you know, I see people all over the world, believe it or not. Like, I have a lot of people in in in Europe that I've, established care with that, have flown over to, come to the office and and everything else. And then I've also, you know, you could follow me on Instagram. It's just doctor Anil Bajnath, d r, Anil Bajnath, n I l b a j n a t h. We have the institute's page there. And, so, yeah, that's the easiest way to to kind of find me and see what I'm doing. Alright. We'll put the links in the show notes. And my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you adopted sooner? That's a great question. You know, I really think I I really came into the health optimization space as a teenager. Right? And, you know, for a very long time, I was a vegetarian and vegetable juicing and everything else. And then, you know, med school really does a number on you. The sleepless nights, you know, cafeteria food, you know, and and and everything else and just a lot of things could set you back. And, the one thing that I wish I I had done sooner was, I don't know. I think screening and, you know, trying to be a little bit more aggressive with, you know, certain certain supplements, certain activities, so that I could, just get things dialed in earlier for myself, because it's it's, again, the waves of life. You know? Like, having a kid, you know, that's a the greatest way to age in dog years is having a kid. You know? It just really accelerates the aging process. You know, I've grown up, you know, training martial arts, and I wish I got into that earlier, you know? You know, and I I I love jujitsu and training and creating that work life balance. I would say that work life balance for me is something personally, that I need to do better on because I'm always, you know, working. I'm always on from the time I wake up in the morning before I even get out of bed, you know, firing off emails, responding to certain things to, you know, listening to podcasts while I shower. You know, I'm always on the go. So for me, creating a better work life balance to disconnect is is something that I wish that I could even do now sooner, you know, and, attempt to, just optimize, those factors. Yeah. Because all we do is work. Mhmm. I spend time with the family, obviously. But Yeah. The unhealthiest thing in our life is work. Yeah. Yeah. Well, it was a great, talking with you. And, yeah, let's, let's stay in touch. Yeah. Always a pleasure. Thank you, sir. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Sim. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.