Heart disease is the number one killer in the world that kills about thirty three percent of people. However, up to eighty percent of heart disease is preventable. But there's one biomarker that's one of the biggest predictors of heart disease and it's genetically determined. You You could be walking around every day with dangerously high levels of this biomarker and increase your risk of heart disease in ten to fifty years. It's called l p little a or lipoprotein little a. L p little a is a low density lipoprotein that contains another atherogenic apolipoprotein called Apo b as well as Apo a. L p little a is the strongest genetically determined atherogenic lipoprotein with 90% of l p little a levels being explained by a single gene called LPA. L p little a levels can vary a thousand fold between people ranging from close to zero to 300. L p little a below 50 is considered to be normal, but anything above eight is already linked to a higher risk of heart disease. A 2021 UK Biobank study among 460,000 subjects discovered a linear increase in atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk after an l p little a concentration of eight milligrams per deciliter. Basically, the higher the l p little a levels, the higher the risk of developing heart disease. And the lowest risk is below eight milligrams per deciliter. At l p little a of forty milligrams per deciliter, the risk increases by twenty percent. At a hundred milligrams, by fifty percent. And at a hundred and sixty milligrams, by up to a 100%. I've measured my own l p little a levels, and they're fortunately two point one milligram per deciliter. That's pretty much as low risk as you can have. I do have some heart disease in my family history, so I'm not gonna take any chances, and I take preventive health quite seriously. But I've also seen dozens of people and their blood work, and they have l p d a levels in their fifties and even a 100 and fifties. That's quite unfortunate because it's mostly genetically determined. But fortunately, there are some ways to lower l p d a levels levels slightly and reduce your total risk of heart disease, which I'm gonna cover shortly. But the most important takeaway is that you should measure your l p little a levels at least once in your life to see where is your genetic set point. L p little a isn't part of the standard lipid panel and most family doctors don't measure l p a at all. That's because l p a testing costs about $50 which is several times more expensive than regular cholesterol. However, you don't have to measure l p a that often. But if you do measure l p a and it's higher than what's optimal, then at least you know where is your genetic risk. And based on that information, you can focus a lot on the other biomarkers and be more aggressive in reducing your total risk of heart disease. Because if you have high l p little a, you're at baseline at a higher risk, so it's more important to reduce the other risk factors. Having high l p little a doesn't mean you're gonna get a heart attack. You might never even get heart disease, but it does mean that your baseline risk is higher compared to someone who has a lower l p little a with everything else being equal. Alright. Now that we've established that the optimal LDL levels are below eight milligrams per deciliter, how do you go about lowering your levels? It's been seen that food doesn't affect LDL levels that much, but higher levels of CRP that reflects inflammation does. This means that if you have high CRP levels, your LDL levels are also gonna be slightly higher. So lowering your CRP and inflammation can also lower your l p l a levels. So how do you do that? Losing weight and achieving a lower body fat percentage will lower CRP because extra body fat promotes inflammation. For women, the optimal range is 18 to 35% and for men, less than 15%. Having less visceral fat is more important for inflammation than subcutaneous fat. Visceral fat is around the organs and it secretes pro inflammatory cytokines. If you have a high waist circumference, then you have more visceral fat. For men, the optimal waist circumference is less than 90 centimeters and for women, less than 70 centimeters. For the optimal waist to lower visceral fat, check out my recent video. Improving overall metabolic health will lower your CRP levels and also lower your visceral fat levels. This means having lower blood sugar, better insulin sensitivity and also lower triglycerides. I have perfect blood sugar while eating 300 grams of carbs a day, so you don't have to be on a low carb diet to achieve this. Just exercise, sleep enough, and lose the visceral fat. There are some supplements that have also been shown to lower CRP such as glycine and n a c, melatonin, asexanthin, curcumin, magnesium, taurine, and ginger. They've also been seen to improve metabolic health. When it comes to actual diet patterns, then it's been seen that a plant based diet can lower l p little a levels and other atherogenic lipoproteins like Apo b within four weeks. L p little a levels can decrease by up to 32 nanomoles per liter, which is the equivalent to thirteen point four milligrams per deciliter. That's quite a large reduction. The effects of different types of fats on l p little a levels are somewhat mixed. Some studies find that saturated fat reduces l p little a levels whereas others that it increases it. So it appears that genetics is a big component to how your body responds to different type of fat intake, especially when it comes to l p l a levels. So in my opinion, the most important thing is to just measure your l p l a and see how your body responds. This 2024 review of 33 clinical trials on the topic concluded that the generally healthy diet rich in unsaturated fats, regular exercise, and weight management is recommended to reduce the risk of cardiovascular diseases. So you should just try to be as healthy of a person as you can and try to optimize all the other biomarkers as well such as blood pressure, your body weight, waist circumference, v o two max, blood sugar inflammation, and all the other lipids. What about pharmaceuticals? There are some pharmaceuticals that can lower l p level a levels. The most potent drugs for that are p c s k nine inhibitors that can do so so by twenty five percent. P c s k nine inhibitors are a subcutaneous injection that you inject every two weeks. In patients with established heart disease, p c s k nine inhibitors were able to reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease outcomes by by twenty three percent in people with an l p little a level over 15 per deciditer and by seven percent in those with less than 15 deciditer. So p c s k nine inhibitors are more effective in people who have high l p little a levels over fifteen milligrams per deciditer. The challenge with p c s k nine inhibitors is their cost. The annual cost of p c s k nine inhibitors is up to $5,000, which is quite a lot. That's up to 10 times higher than other lipid lowering drugs. There's also something called lipoprotein apheresis that's been seen to lower l p d a by up to 86%. It involves taking out your blood and removing the lipoproteins from the blood physically. However, it costs around $2,500 per session, and you would need to do it regularly to see a long term effect. Overall, the most important takeaway is to measure your l p double a levels at least once to see where your genetic baseline is at. With that information, you can make educated decisions about managing the other risk factors for heart disease. If you want to know about the lifestyle, diet, exercise and supplement choices that can help you live longer, then check out this video next. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is Sim. Stay optimized, stay empowered.