You've probably heard that spiking insulin is bad, that every rise in insulin is slowly pushing you towards diabetes. That idea is mostly wrong. In fact, human data shows the opposite. People who mount a strong insulin response after eating tend to have lower risk of diabetes and heart disease years later, even after adjusting for body weight and physical activity. What's more, people with the highest blood sugar after eating have a higher risk of Alzheimer's. In this video, I'm going to explain you the huge misconceptions about insulin and its role in health. And I'll tell you how to improve your insulin sensitivity and overall glucose tolerance for better health and longevity. The reason I decided to make this video was because of a new study in the Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism journal. They used genetic data from over 350,000 white Brits with a mean age of 56.9, and they found that those who had the highest glucose levels two hours after a glucose load had a sixty nine percent higher risk of Alzheimer's compared to the lowest glucose levels. They also had a twenty three percent higher risk of all cause dementia. And they used a specific two hour post glucose test for this. I think that most people do know that high blood sugar levels are not only associated with diabetes, but also dementia, heart disease, and overall death. However, this study used a different design. Instead of looking at people's average blood sugar levels, which in fact was found to show no association with Alzheimer's, the researchers looked at specifically the people's blood sugar levels after they had consumed a large bolus of glucose. The rationale is that if a person has poor metabolic health or their body isn't producing enough insulin, their blood sugar levels would stay elevated for longer. And that's why they see an increased risk of future diseases. The researchers did in fact find that a high fasting insulin and insulin resistance were also associated with a higher risk of Alzheimer's dementia. However, the confidence intervals for these findings were wide, and they included one point zero, which means that these associations were not statistically significant. In contrast, the two hour post low glucose had a narrower confidence interval that didn't include one point zero, which indicates a statistically significant association with increased risk of Alzheimer's dementia. So the true test of your metabolic health and metabolic resilience, as well as future risk of diseases, is how well your body is able to lower its blood sugar whenever your blood sugar levels go high. It basically reflects your insulin sensitivity, how well your body produces insulin in response to the rise in blood sugar, and how well it's going to lower the blood sugar. This made me remember several other studies that have also found that people who are bad at producing insulin in response to eating have a higher three and five year risk of diabetes, whereas people who have the strongest insulin response have the lowest risk. And these are not small reductions in risk. The risk of diabetes or prediabetes for the middle insulin response group after three years was thirty three percent and forty seven percent after five years in this study. However, for the highest insulin response group, it was eighty one percent lower after three years and eighty two percent lower after five years. You can see from this graph showing the difference in blood sugar levels two hours after the oral glucose challenge. The highest insulin response group had the lowest blood sugar levels in response to consuming the glucose. A standard glucose challenge is 75 of glucose in 250 to 300 milliliters of liquid, and they have to consume it in five minutes. This test is supposed to test how well your body would produce insulin when you consume a large bolus of glucose or carbohydrates. If you have poor metabolic health and insulin resistance, your body would produce very small amounts of insulin. And therefore, your blood sugar would stay elevated for longer because the job of insulin is to lower the blood sugar. If there's no insulin or little to no insulin, the blood sugar stays elevated. If your metabolically healthy and your insulin is negative, then your body would produce enough insulin to lower the blood sugar, and it produces just enough insulin to do the job. It will be autoregulated based on the demand. It's basically like a VO2 max test for your metabolism. How well is your body able to function to lower the blood sugar? The faster and stronger you are with your insulin production, the better your metabolism is, the faster you lower the blood sugar, and the lower your risk of future chronic diseases, because your metabolic health is much better compared to people who produce little or no insulin. The fear a lot of people have is that if you produce a lot of insulin in response to eating, you're going to drive the process of diabetes, kidney disease, atherosclerosis and Alzheimer's. The explanation is that you're going to wear out your insulin production as if there is some sort of finite amount of insulin your body can produce, which is not the case. Now, yes, you can cause insulin resistance if you abuse your body, if you eat a ton of processed food, you gain weight, etcetera, but in most realistic scenarios, that's not going to happen. What's more, the Lancet study found no statistical difference in things like body weight, inflammation, lipids, triglycerides, and waist circumference, which means that a robust insulin response doesn't lead to poor health or insulin resistance down the line. It doesn't mean that abusing your body wouldn't lead to diabetes, but producing insulin in of itself doesn't. This is where a lot of people are confused about the physiology of insulin and how it works. Insulin is like a Batman villain in the social media. But the truth is you need insulin to live. Without insulin, you would die. Type one diabetics don't produce any insulin, or they do it in very small amounts. And without injecting insulin, they can die. Insulin is an essential hormone produced by the pancreas to regulate glucose metabolism, inhibit the production of glucose by the liver, to form glycogen, to trigger protein synthesis, as well as regulate fat metabolism. Whenever your blood sugar rises because of eating or anything else, your body will produce insulin to shuttle that glucose into cells and lower the blood sugar down to normal. Insulin attaches onto the insulin receptors and lets the glucose in. In type one diabetes, insulin is not produced, and blood sugar stays elevated, leading to glycation and other types of tissue damage. In type two diabetes, the insulin receptors have become insensitive to insulin, and they're not responding, which also results in high blood sugar levels. Chronically high blood sugar levels are what lead to long term health problems and accelerated aging. Hyperglycemia results from insulin resistance, either not producing enough insulin or not letting glucose into the cells via insulin. In type two diabetes, chronically high blood sugar also leads to insulin resistance over time. Now, very high insulin levels can cause death. If you're a bodybuilder or type one diabetic, if you inject too much insulin, you can die. But this is a completely different story. It would never happen if you're just eating a regular diet. Even if you were to be eating insane amounts of processed foods and sugar, you you would never produce that much insulin that you could die. Eating too many carbs, more than what your body can handle, can, however, lead to the desensitization of insulin receptors, resulting in type two diabetes over time. However, this typically results from poor insulin sensitivity and bad metabolic health, mostly due to obesity and excess visceral fat gain, not because of carbohydrates or insulin per se. For the record, I'm not saying that spiking your blood sugar, spiking your insulin, or eating refined high glycemic carbohydrates is good for you. It certainly isn't suitable for the vast majority of people who suffer from poor metabolic health. However, what I am saying is that producing insulin in of itself isn't a problem. The problem is when you don't produce enough insulin and your blood sugar stays elevated for too long. For example, I've done continuous glucose monitoring while eating up to 300 grams of carbs in one meal, and my blood sugar stays pretty flat all the time because my body has a robust insulin response and it lowers my blood sugar back to normal. My average blood sugar and hemoglobin a1c is even 4.7%, which is perfect and much lower than what people eat on a low carb diet. So how do we then improve our insulin sensitivity and our insulin response? The biggest determinant of your insulin sensitivity is exercise. If your body burns through more muscle glycogen, your body can store more glucose in the cells. Exercise will help to even lower blood sugar without insulin by activating GLUT four transporters that let the glucose in without insulin. Acute exercise could increase glucose uptake into cells by up to a 100 fold compared to being sedentary by increasing GLUT4 translocation by twofold. Exercise also increases your lean muscle mass that stores glycogen, and the more muscle you have, the better your insulin sensitivity typically is. The liver can store only about a 100 grams of glycogen, and that's the only amount it can store. But the muscles can store 400 to 500 grams, depending on your muscle mass. For insulin sensitivity and glucose regulation, resistance training specifically is the best because it depletes muscle glycogen more than aerobic exercise, and it also directly activates GLUT four receptors on the muscles. Cardio will improve insulin sensitivity, but resistance training also increases your muscle mass, which increases your glycogen capacity. However, doing light physical activity like walking after meals will also help to lower blood sugar. In this twenty twenty two study, people who did a thirty minute walk after eating had a significantly lower blood sugar after the fact, and the same when they received an oral glucose tolerance test. Individuals who didn't walk had higher glucose in all examples. In terms of diet, then chronic low carbohydrate intake leads to physiological insulin resistance, which means that the body gets weaker in producing insulin. Long term and short term ketogenic diets in humans, as well as mice, have been shown to cause physiological insulin resistance. This is not the same as insulin resistance in diabetes because it will reverse after you start eating carbohydrates again, and the cause is simply not stimulating insulin. However, we don't know what the long term implications of chronically low insulin and chronically low carbohydrate intake is. Low carbohydrate diets can definitely improve blood sugar levels and insulin sensitivity, and they do it mostly by helping to improve your metabolic health. But the key element here is losing fat, especially losing visceral fat. If someone has metabolic health issues, they're overweight or prediabetic, then a period of low carb dieting can help to lower their fasting insulin and glucose down to normal. However, for optimal metabolic health and insulin sensitivity, you should be eating some carbohydrates at least every once in a while to keep your insulin producing muscles active, for lack of a better word. What you don't use, you lose. And that applies to insulin production as well. The first priority would be to lose weight and to get into a more optimal body composition. For that, you need a combination of exercise and diet. If a low carb diet helps you to achieve that, then that's great. But your insulin sensitivity would be better and your glucose tolerance would be better if you have some carbohydrates in your diet in some shape or form at least every once in a while. And if you think that your body can't handle carbohydrates, then that's the exact problem here. The time of day determines your insulin sensitivity and glucose tolerance. Generally speaking, your body is less insulin sensitive in the evening. However, it's less relevant if you exercise before. The most important thing is not eat too close to bed or during the night. I think this video helps you to overcome some of the misconceptions about insulin and blood sugar. Having poor insulin production, having low insulin production reflects poor metabolic health, which translates to overall long term health risks. Healthy people produce more insulin, that's just a fact. Insulin resistant and diabetic people produce low amounts of insulin, which is why they might have a higher risk of Alzheimer's and dementia over the long term. If you want to know about other biomarkers and which ones are most important, then check out my video where I rank 100 biomarkers from worst to best.