Japanese people are one of the longest living people in the world, with a life expectancy of 85. They also have the most centenarians in the world, with over a 120 k people over the age 100, making up 0.1% of their entire population. That's two to three times more than other countries. Now there are many reasons why the Japanese live longer than others. They have healthier culture, smaller portion sizes, they walk more, they eat a little bit less processed food, they're less obese, they smoke less, they exercise more regularly, and they have good health care. However, there's one specific thing that sets Japan apart from other countries, and it could also explain the reason why they have lower rates of chronic diseases and lower risk of mortality. The reason is their exceptionally high omega three index, which reflects the amount of omega three fatty acids in their blood. Japanese people have an omega three index of over 8%, whereas it's less than 4% in The USA and Canada and four to 6% in France and Spain. The Japanese diet is very rich in seafood, fish, crab, shrimp, as well as sea vegetables and sea moss. These foods are high in omega three fatty acids that have a consistent and long track record of health benefits. I think we've all heard that omega three fatty acids are good for you, and the Japanese people are a prime example of that, and they prove it with their blood work. The omega three index reflects the amount of omega three fats, DHA, and EPA in your red blood cells that you can measure with a blood test. It's a long term marker of your intake of omega three fats, whether from food sources such as fish, seafood, or sea vegetables, or omega three supplements. There's consistent research linking the higher omega three status with lower rates of heart disease, lower dementia, and lower risk of mortality. A 2021 meta analysis of 17 studies saw that people with the highest omega three index over seven point fifty five percent had a fifteen to eighteen percent lower risk of total mortality. A 2022 study also found that the risk of Alzheimer's disease among the highest red blood cell DHA quantile over six point one percent was forty nine percent lower compared to the lowest quintile, less than three point eight percent in fully adjusted models. The omega three index associated with the lowest risk of heart disease mortality is over eight percent, whereas an index of less than four percent is linked to the greatest risk. So what is a good omega three index to have? Based on the research, an omega three index of six to eight percent is already seem to be associated with a slightly lower risk of dying than an omega three index of four percent or lower than that. However, having an omega three index of eight percent or higher appears to be even better. The benefits keep increasing until eleven percent, after which they seem to plateau. But 11% is better than 8%, 8% is better than 6%, and 6% is better than four percent. As I shared with you in the beginning of the video, Japanese people have an omega three index of over 8%, as do the South Koreans. Americans are below 4%, and Europeans are between four to 8%, depending on the country. This works pretty parallel to the consumption of seafood in these regions. Americans eat the least seafood, and Japanese and South Koreans eat the most seafood. There are also some regions with a very high omega three index, such as Alaska and Greenland, But these regions tend to have poor health care and other comorbidities that shorten their life expectancy compared to regions like Japan or South Korea. Now that we know these omega three fats are good for you, the next question is why? Why is it so? The reason has to do with how omega three fatty acids lower inflammation and improve metabolic health. A 2024 meta analysis of clinical trials found that omega three supplementation improves heart function, reduces inflammation, and decreases the risk of cardiovascular disease in patients with heart failure. On top of that, a 2020 meta analysis of 26 randomized controlled trials concluded that omega threes might improve insulin sensitivity and lipid metabolism in type two diabetics. 02/2021 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that supplementation of EPA and DHA at a dose of zero point four to six grams a day was associated with a significant reduction in the risk of cardiovascular disease events and myocardial infarction in a dose dependent manner. So having more omega three fats in your blood means you'll have lower inflammation, better endothelial function, better insulin sensitivity, and better lipid metabolism. All of this translates to lower risk of heart disease, dementia, and lower risk of mortality. Having a higher omega three index is a biomarker that you pretty much want to maintain for the rest of your life. There's no benefits to having a low omega three index. Based on the vast amount of research, having a low omega three index is only harmful. So how much omega threes are we talking about? The health organizations recommend consuming two hundred fifty to five hundred milligrams of EPA and DHA per day. A recent analysis across the world saw that Japanese consume at least five hundred milligrams per day, resulting in an omega three index above eight percent, Whereas most other countries consume less than two hundred fifty milligrams per day, which is why their omega three index is below 6%. Globally, about eighty five percent of people are not consuming enough omega threes. In The USA, it's around ninety five percent. Europe, eighty percent. Africa and South Asia, ninety percent. And Japan is the only country where less than ten percent of people aren't getting enough omega threes. Just think how crazy it is. In The USA, five percent of people are getting adequate amounts of omega threes every day. In Japan, it's ninety percent. If you're not eating seafood regularly, then chances are your omega three index is suboptimal, unless you're taking an omega three supplement, such as some marine based omega threes or algae based omega threes. Another thing we need to talk about is taurine. Taurine is an amino acid that's also been seen to have longevity benefits. In animal studies, taurine extends lifespan, and in human clinical trials, taurine supplementation improves blood sugar, lipids, and blood pressure. And that's one of the dietary factors thought to contribute to the longevity of the Japanese, with higher urinary taurine being associated with lower heart disease mortality. The Japanese diet is high in one of the highest taurine containing foods such as tuna, scallops, nori, and other sea vegetables and sea moss. In comparison, foods more often eaten in Western countries like turkey, beef, and chicken are much lower in taurine, and they're also low in omega threes. The Japanese people are probably getting two to three times more taurine in addition to two to three times more omega threes in their diet. When they're comparing omega threes and taurine, then there's a lot more evidence suggesting that omega three's have more benefits than taurine. However, both have benefits, and the Japanese people eat a lot of both. As I said in the beginning, there are a lot of reasons why Japanese people live longer than others. First of all, they're less overweight and obese than Americans or Europeans. They eat better food, although their diet isn't completely unprocessed or low carb. Their Asian cuisine still comprises of high carb refined foods, as well as deep fried foods cooked in seed oils, but they seem to compensate for that with their very high omega three intake. Another thing is obviously good health care. Europeans also have very good health care, which is why life expectancy in European countries is still above eighties in most Western and Northern European countries, despite their omega three index being slightly lower at six to eight percent. Japanese people have good health care and a high omega three index, which is the best combo. Health care is obviously very underrated. If you live in a more impoverished region with bad health care, then your life expectancy appears to be shorter compared living in a region with good health care and a high omega three index. If you want to know why omega-three supplements and taurine are god tier supplements, then check out my video where I rank 100 supplements from worst to best next.