A lot of people who get into health and longevity start taking some supplements, they go to the gym a few times a week, and they clean up their diet. Those are all very important cornerstones that you should focus on. However, there's one thing in research that over and over again seems to topple all these other factors, especially after the age of 20. I'm talking about cardiorespiratory fitness. The data is remarkably clear. Fitter people live longer. They have lower risk of heart disease, dementia, diabetes, and lower all cause mortality. In fact, if you ate a fairly average diet, slept reasonably well, and did nothing except regular cardio, you'd likely be healthier and live longer than someone with a perfect diet and supplement stack who doesn't exercise. It's that powerful. And in this video, I'm going to prove it. I'll also tell you how to get into good cardorespiratory fitness for the sake of longevity. The reason cardorespiratory fitness matters so much is because it's the earliest marker of physical fitness that starts declining. Cardorespiratory fitness, as measured by your VO2 max, peaks in your early twenties and starts declining by about 10% per decade. This is based on the general population who doesn't exercise, but it's relevant to everyone. Because if you don't train cardio, your VO2 max is expected to drop in a similar pattern. VO2 max refers to your body's ability to consume oxygen during exercise. The more oxygen your body is able to consume and utilize, the better your lungs, muscle, and heart are working. This decline in VO2 max is more so a sign of declining heart and lung function rather than a decline in fitness. The loss of fitness is the byproduct of declining organ function. And to keep your organs working more youthful, you need to train them. The only way to train them is to put them through exercise. A 2018 randomized controlled trial showed exactly that following a protocol of high intensity exercise was able to make the heart of people in their mid fifties look and function like that of a 30 year old. Their resting heart rate dropped, their rheotomex increased, and their myocardial stiffness also decreased. The reason I say cardiorespiratory fitness matters more than any diet or supplement is because of the data. A higher cardiorespiratory fitness has been consistently been shown to be associated with lower rates of heart disease, dementia, diabetes, and mortality. And I'm not talking about some small differences like you see with diet. The difference in high and low cardiovascular fitness in terms of mortality risk is fourfold, which is three hundred percent. That's more than any association with diet quality and it rivals obesity and smoking. People with a VO2 max of 50 have a fourfold lower mortality risk than those with a VO2 max of sixteen point forty five. And the risk reduction is linear. The higher the VO2 max, the lower the mortality. We don't have enough data about people with a VO2 max of 60 and above, but a VO2 max of 50 is relatively fit, although it's not very athletic. There was also a recent study from Norway that found that being unfit was worse for your survival than moderate alcohol consumption. The best case scenario is you always abstain from alcohol and you're always fit. But the groups that were fit and drank alcohol had a better survival than the groups who were unfit but avoided alcohol. It means that whatever the harmful effect of alcohol is, being unfit and not exercising is worse. The reason you wanna train your cardiovascular fitness and keep it high throughout your life is that you will stay healthier for longer than someone who experiences a faster decline in their fitness. There's a certain threshold of VA to max, as well as muscle strength, below which you dip into the frailty and immobility realm. There, you'll have a hard time doing everyday activities, such as walking, groceries, putting on clothes, and wiping your own butt. So how do you go about increasing your cardiovascular fitness? Well, the easy answer is you just do more aerobic exercise. There are many training methods you can use. You can do speed walking, you can do incline walking, you can do weighted wrist walking, you can do zone two running, zone two cycling, swimming, high intensity interval training, Tabata intervals, sprint intervals, 3x4 Norwegian protocol, the list goes on and on. The most important thing is to do aerobic exercise that elevates your heart rate for a prolonged period of time. And it doesn't have to be just running or cycling. You can see improvements in your car directly to fitness and VO2max by doing weightlifting as well. However, there's a caveat here. The VO two max increasing effects of resistance training are limited to people who have a lower VO two max at the baseline. This 2013 review saw that only three out of 17 studies on younger individuals saw an increase in VO2 max from resistance training. In older adults, it was six out of nine studies. The results also depended on baseline VO2 max, with resistance training giving significant benefits if the VO2 max was below 40 in younger individuals and below 25 in older adults. So young and fit people don't really see significant VO2 max gains from resistance training, but old unfit individuals do. That's why it's recommended to do some specific aerobic exercise. Here are some recommendations. Walking. Around 8,000 to 12,000 steps a day. It's great low impact, low intensity movement that's not going to be the make or break for your car to rest of your fitness. However, it's low stimulus, low recovery, and longer duration. Once a week, you should do some high intensity interval training, whether that be the four by four Norwegian protocol or anything else like that. You wanna get your heart rate up to 80 to 90% of your maximum heart rate, for at least two to four minutes, In total for around two to four rounds. That's enough to get your VO2max higher and to prevent age related decline. Once or twice a week, zone two cardio at 60 to 70% of your maximum heart rate for about forty five to ninety minutes. This is low intensity. You can do it while breathing through the nose. Zone two builds your aerobic base, which is important over the course of decades. The most important thing to maintain your cardio respiratory fitness is to train it. It's seen that even if you're athletic and fit in your youth, once you stop exercising, your cardiovascular fitness goes down. And in the process, you lose all the benefits. In this study on elite athletes followed up for twenty two years, those who completely stopped exercising saw a 15% decline in their VO2 max over the course of a decade. Those who engaged in only weekend exercise saw a 10% decline. But those who kept running regularly saw only a 6% decline. 6% is still 6%, but compare it to 15% by not exercising at all. It's more than twice the amount of decline. If there's only one thing you do for your health without changing your diet, without changing your sleep, without changing your general exercise routine, then training your cardiovascular fitness is by far one of the most powerful things to extend your longevity and reduce the risk of chronic diseases. If you want to know about the other things you can do for your health, then check out my health tier list, where I rank a 100 health habits and activities from most essential to nonsense.