Gentlemen, let's see you both. So first question to you, Jurgen, I'm gonna start with you. Why does longevity matter to you and why should it matter to our audience? Yeah. Sure. So, I believe longevity for me at least is not about, living forever, but to maximize my healthy lifespan in order to be able to see my grandchildren grow up, eventually play with them, you know, do sports with them, play football with them. And, I think that reason should apply to everyone here. I believe it's nowadays it's quite easy to achieve that. There are a lot of low hanging fruits out there everyone could could could work on so to say. You just have to sleep well. You just get a healthy diet and work out and, yeah, that's a huge leverage we have right now and I would tell everyone to start with that and see how quickly your body actually, develops. Brilliant. And and, Usim, what does longevity mean to you? Yeah. I got interested in longevity as a preventive health tool because, my grandfather died to colon cancer when he was 36 years old, way before before I was born even, so I didn't want to get some sort of a chronic disease early in life myself either. So I wanted to, you know, go beyond just fitness, which I was into before that, and I wanted to take a more preventive health approach. I also studied anthropology at the time and anthropology is a field that is covering many aspects, human culture, archaeology, evolution, pretty much everything about humans and all different types of humanitarian fields. And as an anthropologist, I was interested in, I guess, the future of the human species. You know, obviously the past is interesting, but the future can be even more exciting and, longevity is something that is just a very scientifically hard problem to solve. So So obviously, weight loss and, you know, diabetes, etcetera, they're relatively simple diseases in the sense that we know what causes them, we know how to reverse them. Obviously their practical application isn't always easy, but life extension, reversing aging, making people live decades longer is a very hard problem, to solve. So I wanted to dig deep into that as well as a scientific, problem. Okay. How do you actually fix it? How do you achieve it? And, also what are the other ethical implications and societal implications that follow if we ever were to quote unquote fix aging or make people live decades longer. I just wanna ask a question to the audience. Who here is here because of something that happened to their health or the health of a loved one? Okay. Interesting. Very interesting. I really wanna ask a question that that goes into We we all think about living long as, you know, the the diet, the exercise, the this and that, but actually preventing early onset is also an important thing. Jurgen, when given that you were working, and you've got your clinic, like how far is technology going now to prevent the to to better detect early onset of let's say cancer? Yeah. So technology is advancing quite quickly. At least at least in our clinic we are already using AI, to detect skin cancer for example. We even have a retina scan that can detect, heart risks and so on and so forth. The real problem I see is that it's still, very fragmented, and we haven't quite yet gotten into into a phase where it's being introduced altogether. And as soon as we are, capable of doing that, we will see major breakthroughs. Sim, I noticed you're not wearing any wearables. You've got a gold ring. As someone who is, you know, one of the leading biohackers in Europe, how do you measure yourself? Measure. Measure. Just measure. And and and also just do you go to a clinic? Do you get measured? Do you do do you do early early onset, like MRI scans or anything like that? Yeah. I do, you know, comprehensive health tracking for myself. I track a blood work. I track my bone density via two max. I take MRI, you know, not not very frequently but occasionally. So I do comprehensive health tracking for myself for the major risk factors and the major chronic diseases. I don't do a lot of daily tracking, so I don't track my sleep regularly. I don't track my blood sugar, you know, regularly. It's because I I think or at least I just find it not necessary. It's mostly like a convenience thing. So, you know, you have to charge the ring, you sometimes forget to charge the ring and then it, just collects zero data etcetera. So I don't find it useful for me to track it all the time because my regular routine or lifestyle hasn't changed that much. So I'm not expecting any, big fluctuations in my sleep quality or sleep duration or HRV or things like that. You know, I had you know, I did have like a Eight Sleep mattress before and, this one just, you know, tracked it all the time. You don't have to charge it so it's always on. So that one, you know, I could have found more useful because of, I didn't have to charge it. But the ring is, I just yeah. I forget to charge it sometimes. Fair enough. Moving on to, you know, on my podcast we talk to a lot of the leading scientists, academics, entrepreneurs in the cell and gene therapy space. This is the kind of stuff that is gonna move the needle like crazily. It's also something that needs a lot of, research and it's gonna take us quite a lot of time there. As an example, I had Liz Parrish on the podcast that talks about gene therapy. She was she was one of the first people to take gene therapy for anti aging purposes. And how she felt after taking it was pretty remarkable if you if you look at her again. There's only been, I think, three hundred and fifty people that have taken gene therapy for anti aging purposes. In terms of stem cells, in terms of tissue repair and all these advanced therapeutics, are there any that you are particularly excited about, Juergen? Well, there's, quite a lot in clinical, use already. I know, you know, we can, for example, repair skin. Yeah. We, see, companies who, kind of lab grow skin and, use that. But, this is, yeah, all about, repairing really. What we don't see yet is, to actually grow proper organs. And, I believe that's probably gonna take at least another decade or so, but that's gonna be the major breakthrough in my point of view. So you think replacement's actually gonna take over in repair? And I think for anyone who doesn't know, rep replacement is the idea that, you know, eventually, the most extreme version of that is whole body replacement. And so you're basically taking your brain and plugging it on it. It's incredibly extreme. There's a lot of people, you know, including pretty much everyone here that I'm sure will raise the ethical concerns around that. Sim, what do you think of that? The whole body replacement? Anything? Repair, replacement, all of it. Yeah. Well, I think they're all something that so, you know, when it comes to life extension then exercising and taking some supplements, they're not going to make you live to 150 or 200. You will need to do something that is more dramatic and more powerful such as gene editing. So you turn on some longevity genes, you turn off bad genes. You need to do some sort of damage repair that you reduce the physical damage on your body and, you know, redoination as well. So you probably need to do a lot of things combined. Interesting, there was a recent study that became popular online with monkeys in China where they genetically engineered some human stem cells, and those monkeys had a reduction in their biological age scores. You know, that's kind of a first step that probably will be one of the initial, I guess therapies available in the next few decades. Some form of gene editing, minor gene editing that we know generally will have positive longevity effects in combination with things like stem cells or exosomes, But again, these things are still even, not powerful enough to make humans live exponentially longer. But it's a kind of first step that we have to take. But yeah, in the most extreme example in hundreds of years, you know, we'll be able to grow cultured organs. You'll be able to replace them and, I guess then you're gonna reach problems thing about like the hard problem of consciousness. It's okay if you replace every cell in your body, but you only have your brain left. Is this are you still going to be you? Because, you know, people think that, okay, my consciousness is in my brain, but that's not really the case. We don't know where the consciousness your consciousness is. We don't really know what creates your consciousness. Is it the combination of is it like an emerging phenomenon? Is it, something located in your some specific organ or something like that? So we don't know the answer to that. So then, the issue is okay if you replace every organ, replace every cell, you're you're literally like a robot with your human brain, are you still you or are you gonna be something else? And will you remember your past memories? Mhmm. Will you remember your current human form in that, form? It's a very interesting point. Just a quick audience check. Who here I'm gonna go up in numbers. Who here is happy to live until they're 70? I'm gonna put your hand up. What about 80? 90? A 100? Actually, keep your hand up. A 110? A hundred and twenty? Forever? Hey. We got a few people that want what about guys? Would you want to what what what year what year would you like to pass? Well, I I always so I I don't you know, maybe a 100 would be good. Like a good idea for me is to live across three centuries. So I was born in 1993. So I would like to live until the age of a hundred and a hundred and six at least. So I'll be living in twentieth century, twenty first and twenty second. But I don't have any like hard goal. Like in my head the actual kind of fun thing to do would be that you stay alive until you figure out immortality. So, you're able to choose to be immortal but then you choose to die. Yeah. Because because there's nothing like virtuous in dying because no one has a choice, right? Everyone will die, at least based on the current status quo. Like everyone of us will die, so there's nothing virtuous about it. But if you had the choice, the option to die then that could be a virtuous thing because you're voluntarily dying. Right? Yeah. So, I would like first like to reach immortality and then choose to die. It's such an interesting point because when we ask the question, a lot of people will say, yeah, I'm happy to die at 80. Ask that to someone who's 79. To say, we had Mehmed Khan from Evolution on on the podcast and he said that people want to feel independent in themselves and then financially independent. If they've still got that, they're happy happy to live longer as well. But it's an interesting conundrum. Right? Because we also have Maslow's hierarchy of needs. Many people are dealing with other stuff. They're not dealing about, like, I wanna live forever because they're dealing with other stuff. I'm not saying that I personally wanna live forever. But it's it's a question that I think is something that only a very few people can actually think about because other people are dealing with just all the challenges and issues of life. In terms of what people come to you at a clinic for, like, what are the key sort of problem areas and how do you help them? And also how do you see your clinic evolving over the next decade or so with new technologies? Yeah. So, most, most people coming to our clinic, they are actually looking for guidance. You know, you have, all these ideas out there. Almost every week, there are new studies, telling you this is the new thing. This is the new thing. Do this. Do this. And they are they're getting lost in it. So, they, first and foremost are looking for guidance and they wanna, establish a baseline on, on their health really. And, we do that running our very deep diagnostics, and then it's quite interesting, what we see. So all the evidence, all the signs, all the data alone doesn't doesn't really, change, behavior of our clients. They need someone to trust our doctors and our coaches, and then they need guidance. And the most important thing we found is, simplicity. So, you can, I don't know, take 1,000, data points, But if you're not able to translate them into three or four or five clear action points and a path, you lose the people? So, yeah. What's year's gonna be like in a few years? We will be focusing much more, on the part after, after the baseline diagnostic on the guidance, part to actually help people change behavior for good. I love that. Do you think the sort of technologies that you're developing and the idea of these longevity clinics will be soon made available to a larger part of the population? Yeah. Many factors that weigh into that one. I always believe kind of into the Tesla principle. So, at the beginning, every new innovation, any new ideas only available for a few. But if we, kind of, put the revenue we are generating by the few people into r and d, into scaling, at some point, it will be available, for more people if, of course, politics help us achieve it. You know, at least in Germany reimbursement of, of these things is, quite a big factor and obviously we need politics to, to play along. Very interesting. What do you think, Sim? Well, it would be financially a good idea for governments to try to make people healthier. So, the average life expectancy is increasing in developed countries, but the worst case scenario is that people live longer and for lack of a better word, they're more burden on the healthcare system as well for longer. So it's not about just making people live longer, it's about actually making them healthier so that they would have higher quality of life later in life and higher life expectancy or the health span as well. So that would reduce you know the health care costs and that also just makes people happier as well to stay alive for longer. Because a lot of the reasons why people say I don't want to live to the age of 100 is because, you know, if you're 100 years old, you you can't move, you can't do any things. So people associate the age 100 with these bad outcomes and the worst quality of life. But the best case scenario is that you are 100 but you're physically as functional as someone who is 50 years old or 40 years old for example. Yeah. That's what in the government, let's say government level and the societal level, the initial focus will be probably on just reducing the burden of chronic diseases so that you reduce the health care costs and that people will just have a higher quality of life, a higher health span for longer as well. And then maybe later, they might pivot more towards the actual life extension but obviously that's not the first priority. Yeah. The most valuable person to society is a healthy 65 to 70 year old because they have basically acquired forty five, fifty years whatever of of lived experience And so you really need healthy people into their seventies now as we get more more of aging populations especially when you think about east Asian countries that are really suffering with low fertility rates. Alright. Let's have a bit of fun. The big moon shots that are going to completely shift the needle forward in this space. I'm thinking embryo selection, gene editing, crazy stem cells, whole body replacement, etcetera. What are you guys most excited about? Jurgen, what can I expect? If I if I were to go to your clinic in fifteen years' time, what would be that thing? Yeah. So, what we are, working on, with our clinic is to understand aging and age real, related diseases. Because as of now, we don't really know in many cases, e g not external factors why we actually age. And in order to do so, you, need to build long longitudinal data sets of multi omics. Yeah. And, once we achieve that, we will be able to detect risk, ages before they actually, appear. So, I believe that's not so far away anymore, maybe ten to fifteen years, but that will be the major breakthrough in my point of view. So it give us an example of that, like paint a picture. Would that mean that let's say, me as someone who is x age, x ethnicity, x this and that, you've got my wearable days, you've got you know that in two years and three months time, I am likely to get x disease. Exactly. At that granular level? Yes. Exactly. Wow. And how how far do you think that's that's away from happening? Depends on, how many, other companies are trying to tackle, this, problem. If you just take us, for example, we are 10, 10 to 12 years old. Okay. Awesome. And Tim, what are you most excited about? A moonshot that you think is gonna really move the needle forward in the next ten, fifteen years? Well, I think in your gene editing is something that will be one of the more bigger breakthroughs. So the reason why some people live very long like a hundred and fifteen, twenty years etcetera is that because they have very favorable genetics that lower the risk of these chronic diseases and also slow down their speed speed of biological aging. So if you were to figure out, Okay, what are these cluster of genes? Some of them we already know about. So like, Okay, everyone will get this. That for example APOE4. We already have very established data that APOE4 genotype or genotype is associated with a higher risk of Alzheimer's and heart disease and vice versa. Those with APOE2 allele have significantly lower rates of Alzheimer's and also greater longevity overall. So there's multiple benefits for APOE2 alleles. Now maybe you could do some form of gene therapy for everyone gets APOE2, for example. And now the APOE four has some evolutionary reason why it exists. Right? Mostly in the past there was, you know, other, environmental risks that, made that phenotype or genotype more advantageous, but in the modern world we kind of have a different environment and we also would require like a different set of genes. So, those are like very low hanging fruit in my opinion like FOXO3, I2F1, APOE4 and APOE2, a few other genes that we already know are associated with greater longevity in humans. So maybe like a handful of genes like five, six of them theoretically could also be already done for gene therapy. Obviously right now they don't exist yet. Right now the only gene therapies are something related to like olastatin which is a muscle growth gene. And, you know, the evidence for their effectiveness is still very limited. So it's hard to know if it actually does work or not. But let's say in the next, I wouldn't say ten, fifteen years but maybe twenty years probably we will have some, let's say, gene gene therapies that have a bit more evidence. But even then I don't think it will become like just readily available that everyone can just get it. You will still have you have to be a slightly earlier adapter. In that case, right now I would definitely not do some gene therapy to go to some sort of private island and get 30 of injection and not knowing if it actually works. So right now, it definitely has very limited evidence but hopefully in the next ten to twenty years we might have something. Very interesting. I just wanna ask a question to everyone here. Put your hands up or not. You know that feeling when you're 20 years old and you go out, you're at college, university, you go, you have a few drinks, lots of drinks, and then you wake up the next morning and and you feel okay and you can carry on the rest of your day. I'm sure a lot of you miss that feeling. Right? I'm not sure how many of you still drink. Would you take a gene therapy if it would allow you to have that same sort of recovery time that you used to have as a 20 year old? Do you wanna put your hands up if you would actually take that gene therapy? And who would not take that gene therapy? I don't know if we can get a mic for people to maybe say why they wouldn't take it. But maybe you can shout it out why why you wouldn't take the gene therapy. Can you just give us give me a mic here. Oh, yeah. I think it's a bit extra to, go through that process just to get that out of it. I would be interested interested in it for, other, opportunities. Yeah. I was just giving a a a an example that people can relate to, but yeah. Of course. Of course. Anyone else why they wouldn't take it? Yeah. Over here. For the first, alcohol is a poison. I know that. But if I had to drink, I could be well the next day because I know how to do it. I I I do I'm I'm sorry. I was just using the example. I think the question really is, would you take gene therapy? No. Okay. Okay. Great. Okay. Onwards to a crystal ball question. Imagine it's 2040. What does the life of a 70 year old look like? And I wanna give an example of something that Aaron D'Souza who's the founder of the enhanced games gave me. He believes that in fifteen years time, there will be 60 year olds, 65 year olds, 70 year olds even that can run as fast as Usain Bolt. And it's a crazy example but guys, over to you. What will the average 70 year old look like in fifteen years time or potentially could look like? Yeah. I'm a bit more conservative on that one, but I'm sure that seventy seventy year old people, by February will be as healthy as 50 45 to 50 year people right now. Definitely. Same. Right. We are like someone who would be 17, twenty forty, though 55 right now. So let's say, I don't know, Joe Rogan, I think he's 55. In 2040, I mean, he's obviously still going to so it depends, you know, if he there's a difference obviously between plastic surgery and actual biological age reversal. Someone could just take plastic surgery and look like 30 or 40 years old. But Will they feel like inside? Yeah. Would they be able to do? I do think that, so initially in the first, you know, let's say a few decades, the idea that the main so the idea behind the longevity escape velocity isn't that okay, in 2040 we're immediately mortal. It's about you're catching this kind of a wave that okay, when you're healthy in 2040, the actual breakthroughs will come in, let's say, 2060 or 2075. So if you're healthy in 2040, you're gonna reach the benefits of this initial breakthrough that causes that okay, maybe eliminate cancer or eliminate Alzheimer's for example. So you have an additional few decades where you could stay alive hypothetically until the age of 90 when we will actually make these massive breakthroughs like gene therapies that will turn you into like a 20 year old. So in the next fifteen years at 2040, you're just going to probably potentially halt the speed of aging that, okay, Joe Rogan is still gonna be as fit and healthy as he is right now. And so, he's not degenerating for the next fifteen years but he's maintaining it what he currently has. He's probably not going to reverse himself back to a 40 year old but he's possibly staying within the range of 55 to 60 rather than, an actual 70 year old or 80 year old. Yeah. There's this idea of longevity escape velocity. This idea of reaching biological or physical immortality and Aubrey de Grey and some people talk about that. And Aubrey de Grey thinks it'll happen in the late twenty thirties and that basically means you can start reversing your age which is crazy. You know, fifteen years potentially out from immortality which sounds very scary. There's gonna be obviously a lot of ethical question raised by that. If there's one piece of advice you guys could give to everyone in the audience to take an important step in their longevity journey today what would it be? Tim. I think, you know getting a good baseline of your health so understanding your health risks currently. So, you know, do you have diabetes or do you have low bone density? Do you have some, you know, God forbid like you know some cancer or something like that. Just being aware of your current health status. Are you, you know, in what kind of health state are you? Are you in a very poor metabolic health? Are you in very good metabolic health? Are you in a risk of future heart disease in twenty years because of your poor lipids or poor blood pressure, etcetera? Just being aware of that will be very important to know, okay, so let's say the goal is I need to stay healthy until 2040, Will I reach it? Will I reach 2040 or, will my risk of this chronic diseases increase exponentially before that? Brilliant. Hagen? Yeah. Exactly the same. Test your biomarkers, establish your health baseline, see see understand your weaknesses, find some suitable interventions, and then get retested and see if your interventions actually worked. If they worked, well, move on. If not, find some different intervention until, your risks lower. We're in a room full of lots of different ideas and concepts and hyperbaric chambers and liver tests and everything. Right? Without mentioning said companies out there, what would you say is the most overhyped product or thing in the longevity space right now? Yeah. I think there are quite a few supplements out there which are, completely useless. K. Anyone in particular? I'll leave it like that. Tim. Yeah. Well, I do. Do you think, a few supplements can be overrated? You know, things like, resveratrol or spermidine or or some of those NMN and R, you know, they do have some effects but they're not going to make you immortal. Yeah. It's crazy how much people how much longevity supplement companies sell NMN. It's, it's crazy. In terms of most underrated out there, what would it be? Yeah. Again, unfortunately, the basics, sleep, healthy diet, and working out every now and then. That's the biggest leverage we have. And since it's so easy for everyone to get, I believe, it's boring and thus underrated. I would say maybe someone else, you know, are a bit underrated so that, they have a lot of cardiovascular benefits and benefits on Alzheimer's risk and, blood pressure, etcetera. So, you know, beyond just the basics, a a regular sauna practice can be quite useful. Brilliant. We'll see you at the sauna later then. Do we have any questions from the audience before we round up about the future of longevity for panelists? Any questions? Got a question over here. If we can get a mic to the lady over here. And if you wanna just address the question to someone or to the whole panel and say your name as well. Hi. Oh, so you talked a lot about the things that we could do physically. But are you also taking into consideration the emotions? Like, for example, repressed emotions and that impact of, for example, autoimmune diseases and cancer risk and stuff like that. I didn't hear any mention of it, which is why I would be, like, super curious to hear if that is something you also consider. So I'm I'm gonna take that first of all because mindset, how we build abundant resilient optimistic mindsets is like so core to everything. My journey has been like a very long journey of healing and so, we didn't talk about on this panel, but I think for me and I again, psychedelics and plant medicine are not you can't prescribe them in this country, so I've gotta be careful of what I say, but I see there's just such promising research, especially if people are doing the work beforehand. Like, I I believe again, you're you're so right that we didn't mention that. It just didn't happen to be in in the questions. We've had a lot of panels today on on psychological abuse and emotions, but I think it's gonna be a core tenant. I think it's the the unforgotten part of longevity. You can't have obsession with v o two max without really finding meaning and purpose in life. Actually, people optimists live 15% longer than people are not optimists. Actually, your I think the two greatest, indicators of long life are, do you have purpose in your life and how strong are your social connections and your community as well? So for me, like, I again, that is the most important part of longevity for me and it's a part of if do check out my Instagram. I talk about mindset pretty much only and and and stay away from the longevity stuff because I think it's it's the unforgotten part of the longevity movement for sure. Guys, do you have anything else to add to that? Yeah. Completely agree with you. I, believe that positive mindset emotions, a strong community, and smiling, laughing, being easy is a very, very strong leverage on living healthy. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I think it's a kind of prerequisite that, if, so, like, to live long if you want to live longer then you're probably enjoying it. Right? So, you know, if you if you don't enjoy your life then you probably don't want to live longer. So it's, there is research that good mental health and positive emotions might be even causal in longevity. But, yeah, I think it's more like a prerequisite as well that if you don't enjoy your life then you're probably not even going to do the healthy things that will make you live longer. Just two things on that actually that I I mentioned it beforehand, but that was a a beautiful picture on a meme with, Brian Johnson and next to him, an 85 year old Italian man. And it was this Italian man drinks wine, he eats gelato and smokes cigarettes a day, and he's gonna live longer than Brian Johnson does everything. And it's, again, it's it's it's a kind of jokey meme but when you eat the, like the Mediterranean diet, you have community, you'd laugh, you enjoy life, you also live longer as well. So do you have any other questions before we wrap up? I know we're just one more question here. Hi. I'm just curious about your, opinion about mushrooms both with and without the psilocybin. Nice. Do you wanna start, Sim? Yes. The recent study on psilocybin saw that it did extend lifespan in worms, if I'm not mistaken. So, you know, there might be some evidence for that as well in the future for humans, but, right now it's more, yeah, like in the trauma space and mental health field. So, it's hard to say what would, the implications for like actual, like hard life extension be. It probably has to do with certain like anti inflammatory properties in these mushrooms. So, you probably might not need the psilocybin per se. It might have to do you can achieve probably like some similar effects with other mushroom, medicinal mushrooms that don't necessarily have that. But, yeah. I think the psilocybin is more useful in, yeah, like the PTSD kind of area. So I I just wanna say something about that because I had, again, I talk about my podcast a lot. I had Christian Angemeier on the podcast. He's the leading biotech psychedelics, investor and entrepreneur out there at Thai Life Sciences and they've they're they're really the trailblazers in this space And we are coming to this insane time in the human story where AI and there's so many changes that are gonna happen. And the one thing that really is the mind killer no doubt is fear. And he really believes that psychedelics will be the antidote to that. And again, he's making money from it, but I will speak anecdotally as someone that's gone on a number of plant medicine journeys that And again, this is anecdotal. I did it in a in a legal setting, in a legal country, but the transformation on my immune system, on my emotional health, on dealing with not just trauma from my life, but pre verbal trauma and if you believe it in generational trauma, has been incredible and I am a huge advocate of it. Caveating that the work has to be done beforehand and that is just my anecdotal, spiel. Again, that's not a recommendation. That's just how it's affected me. And I'm so looking forward to more research coming out there and more people expressing how it's transformed their lives. And again, it it's there's a huge caveat there. This is not an invitation for people to go out there. There is definitely a journey that needs to happen. And, more than happy to have a conversation with anyone about it. Yeah. Anything else to add on that? You're gonna be good. Sums it up. Brilliant. And it's just hit zero. Thank you so much all of you for joining this panel. Please do give these guys a massive round of applause.