What if I told you you could be slowly dying in your sleep? I'm not talking about just aging and getting older. I'm talking about literally suffocating in your sleep. Sleep apnea is a condition of disordered breathing during sleep. You're literally suffocating in your sleep, and you end up with snoring, during which you can stop breathing up to a minute. Sleep apnea is far more common than most people realize. Roughly one in ten adults have sleep apnea. And in older populations, that number can reach thirty to fifty percent. And despite what most people think, sleep apnea isn't just a condition of being old or obese. Even lean, otherwise healthy people can have some episodes of sleep apnea, whether that be due to improper jawline development, airway anatomy issues, or just your sleeping posture. So So in this video, I'm going to walk you through the potential signs that you have sleep apnea, how is it going to affect your longevity and what to do to fix it. If someone told you that you snore while sleeping, then you might have sleep apnea. If you wake up tired and felt like you got hit with a club despite sleeping seven or eight hours, despite not having problems falling asleep or staying asleep, then you might have sleep apnea. If you wake up with a dry mouth and headaches, you might have sleep apnea. If you need to take a lot of naps despite sleeping seven or eight hours, you might have sleep apnea. If you have high blood pressure or cardiac problems while following an otherwise healthy lifestyle, you might have sleep apnea. If you experience severe brain fog and memory problems despite sleeping seven or eight hours and being otherwise healthy, you might have sleep apnea. These signs don't always mean that you have sleep apnea, but they can be signs of poor or insufficient sleep, which might be caused by sleep apnea, at least to a certain extent. If your body doesn't get enough oxygen during the night, it's not going to recover properly, it's not going to repair itself properly, and you will be aging faster as a result of that. It's seen that sleep apnea increases all the hallmarks of aging, such as inflammation, mitochondrial dysfunction, and telomere shortening. The higher inflammation and oxidative stress also lead to the development of chronic diseases that shorten your lifespan, such as hypertension, cardiovascular disease, dementia, and metabolic disease. People with sleep apnea haven't seem to have shorter telomeres, especially in those over the age of 50. The more severe the apnea, the shorter the telomeres. Sleep apnea is also a risk factor for heart disease, Alzheimer's, and cancer. It seemed that the more severe sleep apnea the person has, the higher their estimated brain age is, Meaning that people with sleep apnea age faster, at least their brain does, which increases their future risk of Alzheimer's and dementia. I think the idea is clear. You always need to be breathing through your nose, especially when you're sleeping. This minimizes the risk of apnea and snoring, and it helps your brain to get the oxygen it needs during sleep. If you don't do that and you end up breathing through the mouth, you're probably gonna get more apneas, and it's going to slowly degenerate your health over time. It could even happen over the course of decades without you knowing about it. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices, which are the bond charge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes. They do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin antiaging, hormone optimization, pain management, and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes, especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the Bond Charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most regular Therapeuticers don't have the right wavelengths of light, which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Boncharge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research, and they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code SIIM, s I I m, for a 15% discount. Now we know the potential signs and risks of sleep apnea. If you've experienced any of those symptoms, it might be worthwhile to get it tested. I've gotten two sleep apnea tests over the last two years. And the reason I did it, first of all, I just wanted to know that. I wanted to have a guarantee that I don't have sleep apnea. And second of all, although I'm not obese, I still have relatively thicker neck due to strength training. And you can get sleep apnea even if you're otherwise lean and with low body weight if you have a slightly wider or thicker neck. That's why a lot of bodybuilders use CPAP machines during sleep. They have so much muscle and their neck is so wide that they get sleep apnea similar to an obese person. Now, I'm no bodybuilder and I'm not massive, but I just do these things just to be sure and because it interests me. Fortunately, you can measure sleep apnea with an at home test kit, such as this one, and you don't need to go to a sleep lab to get a full sleep study. Both of my test results came back normal, and I don't have sleep apnea. It's perfect in order for you to experience a few apnea episodes during the night because you're in deep sleep, but they should be relatively infrequent and low in number. Sleep apnea is diagnosed when you have five or more apnea or hypopnea episodes per hour of sleep. If you sleep seven hours and you have five apneas per hour, then that's 35 apneas in total. But it can be up to a 100 apnea episodes throughout the night. I had four apneas in total doing my first test and the second showed only one apnea, which is very low. That will put me well into the normal category and low risk of sleep apnea. I would recommend everyone over the age of 40 to get a sleep apnea test at least once, especially if you don't have anyone else to tell you whether you snore or not. And especially if you have a wider neck, whether that be because of being overweight or doing strength training. Alright. Now let's talk about what can you actually do to improve sleep apnea and your breathing during the night. I'm going to divide the strategies into three levels, going from the least invasive and the easiest to the most invasive. Level one options to treat apnea include mouth taping. This is a simple way to fix mild mouth breathing during the night. By mechanically forcing the mouth closed, you're just going to end up breathing through the nose. Don't worry. You're not going to suffocate or become hypoxic because your body will just make you breathe through the nose. Second, nasal dilators. My friend Lee Even also has these kind of nasal strips you put into your nose that dilate the nostrils. They basically open up your nostrils, making it easier for you to breathe. Breathing exercises are also useful for teaching yourself how to breathe through the nose. You should spend 95% of the day breathing through the nose because that's what's healthy. Mouth breathing is only justified if you're speaking or doing exercise or you're yawning. Losing weight is an important factor. If you're overweight or you have a very big neck, then losing weight tends to improve breathing during sleep. If you're just fat and obese, then lose the weight. If you're very muscular and you have a super thick neck, then even in this situation, you might want to lose the weight. At this point, you're carrying too much muscle mass and is wrecking your sleep. Mouth breathing can also be brought about by allergies or poor air quality. If your sinus cavities are inflamed or clogged up with snot due to allergies or infections, then that can make you breathe through the mouth. To fix that, you need to look at your environment. Is there poor air quality? Is there house mold? Is there something else in your environment that gives you allergies? And try to treat them. Level two option is the CPAP machine. You should get a proper sleep apnea diagnosis and exhaust the level one options first before you get a CPAP machine. However, the CPAP machine can literally save your life if it helps you breathe during the night. If you're in the process of losing weight, then it's still better to use the CPAP machine during this time because bad sleep makes it so much harder for you to lose weight. If you're a muscular bodybuilder or power lifter and you don't plan to lose any weight and you wanna stay huge, then you definitely need a CPAP machine. Level three option is surgical intervention. Sometimes, sleep apnea is because of a crooked or recessed jawline that collapses during the night, resulting in snoring or blocked nasal cavities due to some reason. Surgery to reconstruct or clean blocked sinuses can also be lifesaving, and the same with the jawline. However, you still need to follow the level one options first. Fixing sleep apnea can be one of the best things that you do for your sleep. If you're optimizing your sleep, but you still feel tired despite sleeping seven to eight hours, then it's worthwhile to investigate whether or not you have sleep apnea. But it also might be that you're just not optimizing your sleep enough. If you want to know how I took my sleep scores from 75 to a 100, then check out this video next.