A lot of people suffer from excess visceral fat because it accumulates around the organs and you can't see it with your bare eyes. I've managed to reduce my visceral fat from 359 grams, which is already below average, to below a 100 grams, which is extremely low and optimal. One of the small tweaks I made to help me achieve such low visceral fat was adding green tea to my diet. Green tea, in my opinion, is one of the healthiest beverages in the world, if you consume it in the right amounts and at the right time. So in this video, I'm gonna share how adding one to two cups of green tea per day can eviscerate visceral fat. The reason I started drinking green tea was because there's plenty of research suggesting that it helps target specifically visceral fat. There's a 2012 randomized controlled trial showing that catechin enriched green tea for twelve weeks resulted in greater visceral fat loss than in the placebo group. The catechin group lost 9.5 square centimeters of visceral fat on average compared to the 0.6 square centimeters of the control group, which wasn't significant. The participants who drank collagen enriched green tea lost 6.23% of their visceral fat compared to only 0.38% in the control group. That's 5.85% greater reduction in visceral fat for the green tea group. The catechin group consumed three hundred fifty milliliters of green tea with six hundred and nine point three milligrams of catechins and sixty eight point six milligrams of caffeine, whereas the control group consumed only eighty six point two mg of catagens and forty point four mg of caffeine. So green tea high in catagens is more effective than green tea low in catagens. Another 2009 study found that green tea catagens enhanced the loss of abdominal fat from exercise. The green tea group lost 6.2% of abdominal subcutaneous fat, whereas the control group gained 0.8. Total abdominal area decreased 7.7% compared to 0.3%, and intra abdominal fat reduced 8.7% compared to 1.4%. They consumed 500 milliliters of green tea with six hundred and twenty five milligrams of catechins compared to zero in the control group. And both groups consumed thirty nine milligrams of caffeine. A 2024 meta analysis of 24 studies saw that exercise plus green tea results in a small but statistically significant bonus reduction in fat mass of about one to 1.5 kilograms compared to exercise alone. So whenever you are exercising and trying to lose fat, then drinking green tea on top of that makes you lose a little bit more extra fat, especially visceral fat and intra abdominal fat. The reason green tea helps with visceral fat loss is because of its catagen content. In green tea, the specific catagen is EGCG. Catagens are polyphenolic compounds that activate pathways related to fat metabolism, such as AMPK, that helps with visceral fat loss and fat oxidation. This is not exclusive to green tea. It's seen that in mice, black tea and or lung tea also reduce visceral fat thanks to their polyphenols. However, green tea has the strongest effect because it's the highest in polyphenolic compounds. So how many cups of green tea are we talking about? In the randomized controlled trials, a dose of around six hundred milligrams of catechins yielded the best results. That's the equivalent of about three cups of green tea per day. However, you could also have higher amounts of catechins in your brew and ultimately consume only one to two cups. Here's a list of the highest catechin content in different types of green tea. Matcha has around a 100 to a hundred fifty milligrams of EGCG per 100 milliliters. Sencha green tea has 60 to eighty milligrams, bukoro 40 to 60, bancha twenty to 30, and huichia less than ten milligrams. Matcha can contain up to three times more catechins than regular brewed green tea. The more leaves you have per cup, the higher the catagen and caffeine content. That's why matcha wins, because you consume the whole leaf, not just an infusion. The way you brew your green tea also affects its catagen content. 60 to 70 degrees Celsius or a 140 to 58 Fahrenheit preserves delicate compounds like theanine, but it's also lower in catagens. 80 to 85 degrees Celsius or 176 to 85 Fahrenheit is optimal for high catagen release without destroying them. Over 90 degrees Celsius or 194 plus Fahrenheit equals more catagens, but EGCG can get degraded. It also makes the brew a lot more bitter. How long do you seep the brew will also determine its catagen content. Less than one minute results in lower catagen release. Two to three minutes is a good balance of catagens, flavor, and theanine. Over five minutes results in the most catagens, but it's also very bitter and has more caffeine. If you repeat the brewing, then the first brew contains the most catagens. Second brew about 30 to 50% of the original catagen content, and the third brew has minimal remaining catagens. So you just stick to one to two brews at most. Here's a quick summary of getting the most out of your green tea catagens. Keep the water temperature high, but below 90 degrees Celsius, so optimally between 80 to 90. Steep a little bit longer, about three to five minutes, to get more catechins from the brew. Use more tea leaves per cup. The more leaves, the stronger the bitterness and the more catechins it contains. That's why whole leaf consumption, such as matcha, contains the most catechins. Surprisingly enough, the time of day when you consume green tea can also affect its effectiveness. Here's the best time to drink green tea. In the morning after breakfast. Why? Because it increases your metabolic rate and supports fat oxidation. You should avoid drinking green tea or matcha on an empty stomach. Green tea can be acidic and can cause nausea or stomach discomfort. That's why you might get dizzy or nauseous if you drink it on an empty stomach. And the morning is also the best time for getting some of that small amount of caffeine. Green tea is a good alternative to coffee because it's lower in caffeine. The second best time is before exercise. Why? Because catagens, especially EGCG, plus the caffeine can enhance fat burning during exercise. The best time to do so is thirty to sixty minutes before the workout. Some studies show that green tea increases energy expenditure by about 4%, as well as fat oxidation, especially when combined with physical activity. After meals is also a good time to consume green tea because it can lower the blood sugar rise after eating and improve insulin sensitivity. It also lowers the rise in triglycerides and lipids after eating. In the evening, it's not ideal to consume green tea unless it's decaffeinated because the caffeine could disrupt your sleep, especially if you are a slow metabolizer of caffeine. In the evening, you can opt for lower caffeine green teas like hoistia. As I said, I've managed to decrease my visceral fat to extremely good levels down to 54 grams. And one of the things I did to achieve this was adding around two to three cups of green tea to my diet. Of course, I did a lot of other things that also contributed to my results. Check out my video where I share with you everything I changed about my diet and exercise and supplements to achieve it next.