You've probably heard that a glass of wine for dinner is not only harmless, but actually good for you. And to be fair, observational studies have consistently shown how moderate drinkers tend to have lower rates of heart disease, dementia, and overall mortality compared to non drinkers. But a new study added some much needed context, and it changes how we should think about the association between moderate alcohol consumption and reduced mortality. Is it really better to drink moderately than to abstain from alcohol completely? Or are there some other factors that are much more abstain from alcohol completely? Or are there some other factors that are much more important than alcohol intake? So in this video, I'm gonna break down this new research and why it completely changed my opinion about the effects of alcohol on your long term health. The study was published in the journal Sports Medicine in December 2025, and they analyzed 25,000 healthy adults in the Trondelag Health Study in Norway. They collected data from the two time points in the study, hunt two between years 1995 and 1997, and hunt three two thousand six and 2008. These are the same people followed up for sixteen years. They categorized people into groups based on their alcohol consumption and fitness levels. You had abstainers who consumed zero alcohol, low consumers within recommendations, less than a 140 per week for men and less than 70 grams per week for women, and high consumers above the recommendations, over a 140 grams per week for men and over 70 grams per week for women. They categorized fitness based on age and sex. Unfit individuals, the bottom 20% least fit, and fit individuals in the top 20%, being 80% of the most fittest. What they found was that people who increased their alcohol intake from either complete abstention or low amounts to higher amounts saw a higher risk of all cause mortality compared to those who stayed abstainers throughout the ten years. As you can see from this graph, those who were drinkers in the beginning of the study but switched to abstainers had the highest survival overall. Those who were abstainers throughout the study had the second highest survival. Those who were constant drinkers were third, and those who were abstainers but switched to drinkers had the lowest survival. It might be a bit surprising that the people who were constant abstainers from alcohol were the second best survivors, and the first best survivors were the ones who switched from drinking previously to now abstaining. The reason for that could be that in the general population, people who never drink alcohol were either previous alcoholics who has some past damage from their alcoholism or they have some medical condition that forbids them from drinking alcohol, such as the elderly people who have certain medical conditions. This is the reason why you often see in observational studies that drinking zero amounts of alcohol is worse for your health than consuming small amounts of it. However, those results are often confounded by health problems, healthy user bias, or socioeconomic status. Some analyses that control for these factors find that regular alcohol consumption isn't linked to lower mortality. As this new Norwegian study showed, abstaining from alcohol is better for you than consuming it in moderate amounts. Even if you were a regular consumer of alcohol in the past, your survival curve will improve if you stop drinking alcohol, at least reduce it to as close to zero as possible. Let's talk about the aspect of fitness, because it made this study a lot more interesting and more valuable. Most other studies on alcohol intake don't look at this. Basically, the researchers also look at the participants' cardiovascular fitness to see how that would affect the results of alcohol on survival. It's no surprise that the fitter individuals had better survival than the unfit individuals. But what they found was that cardiorespiratory fitness was a much better predictor of survival than alcohol intake. In this analysis, they found that the individuals with the lowest mortality were constant abstainers and who were also always fit throughout the study. The second best were drinkers who were also in good fitness. Third place were drinkers who switched to abstaining alcohol but were in good fitness. Fourth place were abstainers who switched to drinkers but had good fitness. Fifth and sixth place were unfit drinkers and unfit abstainers. And the last place were drinkers or abstainers who had lost their fitness throughout the ten year period. What it reveals is that cardiorespiratory fitness is a stronger predictor of mortality and longevity than alcohol intake, and that abstaining from alcohol by having poor cardiorespiratory fitness is bad for you. It's worse for you than consuming alcohol in moderate amounts, but having good cardiorespiratory fitness. Fitness is like a buffer against moderate alcohol consumption, because it provides so many other health benefits that moderate alcohol intake isn't able to counteract, and what abstaining from alcohol doesn't provide. Abstaining from alcohol doesn't improve your heart function just by virtue of abstaining from alcohol, but improving your card respiratory fitness does. I'm pretty sure heavy drinking is still bad for you, even if you have excellent fitness. But having bad card respiratory fitness is worse for you than drinking alcohol. So the best case scenario is you abstain from alcohol and you have good card respiratory fitness. The worst case scenario is drinking alcohol and having a bad car respiratory fitness. But it's worse for you to have bad car respiratory fitness than to drink alcohol. So how much fitness are we talking about? How fit do you need to be? In the study, they used a pretty crude way of categorizing people's fitness. So it's not exactly sure where the cutoff point is. But they basically categorized people into either the bottom 20% of fitness, the unfit individuals, and the top 20%, the fit individuals. They didn't measure people's VO2 max specifically, but we can estimate what the bottom 20% and top 20% would look like in terms of VO2 max. VO2 max and fitness decline with age, so younger individuals have a higher number, and males also have a higher VO2 max than women. As you can see from these numbers, being in the top 20% of VO2 max isn't that impressive. A VO2 max of 38 for a 30 year old is pathetic if I'm totally honest with you. But based on the study, it was enough to result in greater survival compared to lower fitness. Because the researchers cut off the fit and unfit categories at the bottom and top 20% of individuals, we can only speculate whether being in a higher fitness, like top 10 or top 1% of fitness, would provide even greater risk reduction. It's very likely that it does. Based on other studies on VA2 max, individuals with a VA2 max of 50 have up to a fourfold lower risk of mortality than those with a VA2 max of 17 to 18. A VO2 max of 50 is significantly higher than the top 20% cut off point in the Norwegian study, but it's still not elite athlete level who would have a VO2 max of 70. Even me, who isn't a recreational athlete, I've clocked in a VO2 max of 66. The overall message is quite clear. It's very important to have good cardiovascular fitness. It's not just about looks or fitness. It's about how well your heart, your lungs, and overall body is able to function. In the context of this longitudinal study, it's important to always be fit and not see a decline in your fitness as you get older. Of course, as you get older, your fitness will decline slightly, but I'm talking about standardized for your age, age adjusted decline. Regarding alcohol intake, I think it's also pretty clear that alcohol doesn't provide you with any health protective or beneficial effects. And it's generally better to stop consuming alcohol or keep it to as close to zero as possible. If I were to rank moderate alcohol consumption in terms of health habits, then I would say it's okay, but it's not going to improve your health. But if I were to rank improving your cardiovascular fitness, then it's absolutely god tier and one of the most powerful ways you can improve your overall health. Check out my video where I rank a 100 health habits from worst to best next.