And the western medical system is not built on prevention. Oh, you're prediabetic. Come back when you're full blown diabetic. And so it's that way with everything. Wait till you fully have the disease, and then we'll fix you. But we're not gonna do anything until you're there. So when we talk about the collagen induction, I think what often gets missed is the fact that skin is like an organ and if we just eat collagen, there's not much road or repair happening just merely because of eating collagen. So same as you increase protein, but you also need to do resistance training to cause microinjury to be able to get that synthesis going. The technology when you cause these micro damages, you can either count on your your skin's own ability to repair or you give it something extra. Welcome, guys. We're here at the, IHORE retreat in, Chennai, India. We spent the last week going through a lot of different tests and, the program here. So this is, one of our last days here, and I decided that, you know, we're all involved in social media, and we're all, you know, creating content. So we'll just sit together and discuss, different topics. So, yeah, before we start sharing our experience, maybe you can you can just briefly introduce ourselves as well with, a few sentences. It's out to you. Yeah. I'm Inka Land. I'm a clinical nutritionist and a neuropsychologist and rhythm creator in health and wellness and longevity. Yep. Oh, I'm doctor Joy Kong. I'm a antiaging doctor and stem cell specialist. I have a practice in Los Angeles, and, also train a lot of physicians in stem cell therapy. Oh, me. Okay. I'm Dave Pascoe. I'm a biohacker. I am a rejuvenation athlete, and I am a longevity enthusiast. And, just address the elephant in the room. What? What? You don't like the way I'm dressed? I said you're a longevity? Yeah. I mean, apparently, I you know, you can come here to AWO and just get random surgeries. Just it's one of the on the docket. No. I had, I've had bone spurs in my shoulder for, gosh, maybe a decade or so. And I saw doctor Joy about getting stem cells and got the stem cells, healed up the arm great, but the bone spurs are very sharp, so they kept tearing up the tissue. And I tried to see a western doctor about getting those removed and they refused. So, it just so happened that when I came here, one of our the visits that we got was a consult with, orthopedic specialist. And they suggested they could remove them no problem. So I hadn't come here with the intention of getting a surgery in India, but, the opportunity presented itself, and it was wonderful. It was probably the best decision I ever made. Wow. And they did log in the next day. Right? Yeah. Exactly. So you're, yeah, pretty fast. You were how long would you have waited in The US? Oh, months. Months. I waited months just to see the surgeon who told me maybe she wouldn't do it. Yeah. So Yeah. It was great. And then so I'm I'm, what, few hours like post op. I got came home last night. I'm on a a painkiller right now and muscle relaxants, so pay no attention to anything that comes out of my mouth right now. Right. Well, I just wanna wanna add a little bit to you all because I was really impressed by how fearless you were about this surgery. It's like the opportunity presents itself. He does, like, a one hour research and a doctor, and and go for it. Yeah. It's part of, well, I've been doing surrender experiments for quite a while now. So every so often, you just have to have faith and trust and pray on it. And, you know, if the answer comes back, go for it, then there's nothing to worry about. Yes. Yeah. I definitely felt right. It looked like you recovered already by the time. And the staff was amazing. I was it was a private hospital. I was the only patient. I had like, eight people there all attending to me, which was really awkward. Yeah. But they were so gentle, so kind. They didn't speak much English. Right. And the ones that did speak English, I really had a lot of trouble understanding. So, a lot of pantomiming, a lot of smiling and nodding. Mhmm. But it was great. It's a really good experience. And surrendering. And surrendering. Yeah. Alright. So even if you shouldn't listen to Dave because he's on muscle relaxants, the one person you really shouldn't listen to is me because the the expertise I'm surrounded with here is is just just from another word. I personally started this entire biohacking or longevity journey only two years ago. Did you say your name? Oh, yeah. I did not say my name. My name is Adam, and you can find my channel on YouTube with no product 73. I was well known in in other other other other fields before. But anyhow, so so the interesting thing about me or what I'm finding myself in the that I try to seek out the people who have the the the best results in the longevity field, who who reverse their biological age the most. Right? These imperfect biological age algorithms, people competing with each other, and I seek out those who are the most successful in doing these things. And, that's that's if if you are interested in that, then you talk to me about that. Yeah. We'll discuss the the the longevity World Cup a bit later. It's kinda relevant to some of the bloodharkers we tested. But, yeah. Well, it was, great to meet you all here, and we had, like, a really fun week this, in addition to all the tests we did, just the company and the dinners and the connotations we have was really amazing. What was this is most important. My sixth time doing this retreat here in Nairo. This was I think it's the fourth time, and this was your first time. So what was your first time impressions? I thought it was very cool. I was very impressed with the, all the services, all the testing. Mhmm. The surgeries. Yeah. Yeah. Very impressed. Right. It's not just that, but, you know, I I traveled around the world on specific Bitcoin conferences. And I I went to hotels before, but this this little palace is is on another level. Like, I've never seen anything like this. You get a personal butler. Like, what the hell is going on here? Palace is right. Right? Right. It's very much a It's really a palace. Yeah. Regarding the retreat part, the Ivo part, I actually didn't tell any of you anyone that I'm coming, so I just appeared Right. As a surprise. Yeah. But I I decided to only choose the the testing parts of the retreat. Right? So got a full body MRI, DEXA scan, calcium score, a blood test that's so comprehensive. I never received this comprehensive blood test before. And and and and some other tests as well. And all these came out of, like, a thousand something dollar. Right? That's the you cannot do this anywhere else. Mhmm. So it's it's amazing. Yeah? Yeah. Look. And the the package, it's, US would cost something, like, three times four times more to, like, 20 k. So maybe that if you were to, you know, pass the hotel, five star hotel and things like that. Even if you add the flight costs to this, it's still gonna be cheaper than trying to do it in Europe or USA. So Like this surgery. No insurance. It was under $5,000. Right. There's no way you could touch that in The States. How much is it in The States? My insurance deductible would be, like, 7,000, so I'm sure it'd be way more than that. Mhmm. Yeah. That's a great idea. We're probably talking about $2,530,000? Yeah. That's probably still on the low end. And then there's physical therapy that has to come afterwards, but my insurance will pay that. Yeah. I didn't really know what to expect except that, there were were gonna be a lot of tests. But it definitely exceeded my expectation. The the level of professionalism of the staff at the facility is big, beautiful with, a lot of, gadgets they have that we've tried all of them pretty much. You know, I didn't really know what posture evaluation was, and and that's so nice that somebody is looking at the the g fives in how I'm positioning my my spine, my my body, and and how we can even correct it. And and that could solve some real long term issues. I mean, that's not even looked at. Mhmm. And, and we're we're doing all these tests very concentrated. Within first two days, all the tests are pretty much done. And and that is really efficient because I've been to a clinic, in in LA to do, testing for for toxicity, right, for whatever, the the various, toxicities and mold and etcetera. And that there were so many tests. I spent a lot of time in the clinic and I still came back with all these boxes of tests that I had to do by myself and it's cumbersome and and I have to read through all the instructions and it took me a month to just get all the labs sent back. Mhmm. So to have somebody everything's ready and it's all done where we were, you know, they basically shepherded to different spots and do this, do that, and then it's all done. It's just it it's nice. It's a nice luxury to to make it to have it done so easily. And, and and and then we got other signals. I mean, I love the massages. I mean, just like, can get amazing massage every day, and that's a luxury. And then the different energy devices helping with muscle toning, and then, you know, you can do things for for for beautifying, right, for, for face and and and body optimization. It's just really nice to have that, as options. And then getting all the scans done is really nice. I've never had a DEXA scan. It's really good to know where I'm at, and, thankfully, it's it's really good. And then the, food tolerance testing and and some other, you know, MRI, right, body MRI, which I've never done either. It was a little scary because you always wonder what this MRI is gonna pick out, but, fortunately, it it's all good. But it's, you know, whether or not people are scared, it's still it's it's better to know Mhmm. Than not being aware. Yeah. And, the calcium score for the the arteries and, you know, heart evaluations, all those are really, really, really nice to have everything so compact and all done. So I I it and then on top of it, I feel really pampered, you know, living in this gorgeous five star hotel with beautiful food. There's so such abundance of food and with different restaurants and all high high quality, high caliber, you know, cuisines. And, yeah, really no complaint. People are extremely polite and, helpful. You have a car taking us places we need to, hyperbaric. Right? We want so right now, they they're taking us to a hyperbaric place, but I think very soon that they're gonna have hyperbaric, in house and just they keep adding new things. So it's a very, very exciting place. So I'm definitely coming back because I want to be pampered. And I want to check again to see where I'm at. Yeah. Because, obviously, I because I hadn't been checking even though I'm an antiaging doctor. I had access to all the tests, but I just didn't do it. So when I didn't designate the time and and to make it easy to just get it done, then I didn't. So for a few years, most of these things have not checked. So to just get it checked and know where I'm at and actually knowing where the blind spots are at, now they're giving me some supplements. Right? They're making things easy, that everything is is all there, that I can fine tune my health. And then so maybe in six months, I'll come back and check again and fine tune it. So just a really nice option to Yeah. To do something for yourself and take the time for yourself. Yep. Of all the high-tech stuff, I I have to admit, I'm a little embarrassed to say, I initially scoffed at the, postural assessment Oh. Until I saw how out of line my body is. And I said, wow. I had no idea I needed this. Mhmm. Yeah. And then the, the torture test they had us do with our arms. You're laying backward, and I can't do it with the other arm. You do, like, a goalpost with your arms, and, mine were way out here to start with, and it took forever. Laying on the ground, it took forever for my arms to finally touch the floor. There's no idea how tight that was across the chest before. Yeah. Just little things like that make such a big difference. Yeah. Yeah. And it's not done. Even in antiaging clinics Mhmm. No one was looking at it. Unless you are seeking that physical therapy posture alignment, right? You have to go to a clinic, you have to seek it out, then no one is looking at it. You have to have an injury burst and then you go through physical therapy to get straightened out whereas this is preventative therapy. Yeah. Yeah. Like I said, what you said that you just didn't do it before. You know, whether that be because, it's inconvenient to try to schedule things or find them and, you know, get a good spot, etcetera. But, yeah, you come here. You just do it for one week, and then you're finished. You don't have to worry about, finding a different spot, flying out to some other city, for example, to do the test or whatever the case is in The States or Europe. So, yeah, here, they just we we we've been here for you many times. You know, I stopped doing other tests in other places pretty much because it's Joe was so convenient, here for us to do it. Yeah. Well, I also find it that you never really know what to test before you do this comprehensive testing, meaning that most people get tested in general health care before, sorry, after the disease has manifested. But with this core set of markers that we're testing, for example, here, quite a wide range of core markers, the deviations start way before disease is manifested ever. So the only way really to know what you need to be testing is first to test everything and then see what seems to be going in a wrong direction and then test again. So that's what I think is one of the best things to do these kind of things. Seems like why would I ever need a posture assessment, being which, by the way, I also had, but I didn't realize that my spine was a little bit leaning towards the right. So now I know I need to work on that, and now I know I need to test it later again. So they that's one of the greatest benefits. So so although I don't subscribe to this, but I I know why people, by the the medical community don't want to do normal testing on people. It's because the argument goes something like this. If you do, like, a full body MRI and they find something, they probably not gonna find anything, like like, really bad, but you're going to be fixating on that thing. And instead of instead of do the next test or or whatever test that your actual problem is, you're going to be stuck and put mental and brainpower onto that thing that the MRI found and not not dealing with the with the actual issues that you have. Right. I mean, yeah, you can make the argument in many ways. Like, it can cost more, you know, the health care system can't afford to cover everyone's, like, a full comprehensive bot panel, every year. So, and, yeah, you don't necessarily need to do it, if you're otherwise healthy. But at the same time, you know, the average so maybe we don't need to take a blood panel all the time because, you know, we're generally healthier than the average person. But the average person, you know, they do have things that, they could work on if, so for them, you know, it's even more important to do, like, a blood panel and see what is their actual issues. Yeah. Which one is the chicken and the egg? Because the more you start testing, I think the healthier you become. That that takes you to the higher than average health after which you can reduce the testing. Right. Yeah. I mean, the testing itself doesn't, but if you test, then the news You know something. Yeah. I I need to yeah. Yeah. Focus marker. Yeah. So, I mean, a lot of people might do a lot of tests, but they don't change anything. So that's kind of a waste. So if you do a lot of tests, but you stay the same, then, you know, the tests are gonna waste of time and waste the money at that point. But, yeah, we come here, we do the tests. I think we're also just all more motivated as well to try to improve these markers so that it's worth it in this scenario. And the western medical system is not built on prevention. Right. It's like, oh, you're prediabetic. Come back when you're full blown diabetic. You know? And so it's that way with everything. Wait till you fully have the disease, and then we'll fix you. But we're not gonna do anything until you're there. Yeah. So From a there is a marketing marketing book that explains why you should you should provide a cancer drug instead of a preventative cancer drug. It's because how much do you pay? If you already have cancer, how much do you pay for the drug? You pay a lot more than than if you don't have and you just want to prevent it. Right? Yeah. Yeah. So maybe let's talk about the the blood markers. So we did a pretty comprehensive blood panel. It's a 181, blood markers, And, we did it the numbers Mhmm. The day when we arrived here. So, yeah, it might do things like, you know, the basics, like blood sugar, immune cells, red blood cells, lipids, liver markers, kidney markers, iron, vitamins, minerals, heavy metals, hormones, a lot of other markers as well. So, what's your impression of the the the panel? Is this something that you think everyone should measure, or, is it something you are already measuring regularly before coming here? What do you measure, like, at home in? It measures almost everything. Right? Very important things that other other labs don't measure, like cystatin c. Right? But it also measures some stuff that really shouldn't be measured, like some vitamin b is that their serum levels are completely irrelevant. So so there is that. But but then again, like, it measures so many things, and it just gives me so much information to work with. It's it's great for me. Yeah. It's just that NC is a quick good marker. So, like, usually, your your doctor might measure creatinine, but, that's only, like, very, limited information about your actual kidney function. You know, Borts and PhenoAge, what's the difference between between kidney function there? Is that in in the PhenoAge algorithm, the lower your creatinine is, the better the PhenoAge gets. In borts, it's the opposite. The higher your creatinine is, the better the borts gets. You know why? Because cystatin c is a better kidney marker. Therefore, if we measure cystatin c and, and it's good, then what creatinine shows is how much muscle you have. Yeah. Right. Yeah. Yeah. You we can mention and this longevity, World Cup as well. So it's, based on the phenol age, biological age, clock, which was built by and, others. That is based on 10 blood markers, things like glucose. Nine. Nine. Plus chronology relation. Mhmm. Yeah. So it's a glucose, CRP, albumin, creatinine, and and lymphocyte percentage, mean cell volume, RDW. What else? ARP, alkali phosphatase. Phosphatase. And one more. Let's see here. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know. Okay. Well, something more. Yeah. I put my numbers for my newest results. I got the 15, which is like a like a regular result for me. And, yeah. So it's it's a pretty good biological age. Measurement is not perfect. It has its limitations because, you know, your blood sugar can fluctuate every day. And we mentioned creatinine, you know, it's not, I think, the best marker to use in this formula because of the also mass component. So it's always, like, limiting my results. But it's a good start. I think it's a better start than, like, these methylation based biological age groups. I I could ask if that was age 15 or a fifteen year reduction. But in your case, it's the same thing. Yeah. Yeah. What do you think about the these are blood markers, the you know, it markers? To be honest, I haven't gotten mine back yet because I I delayed my test up by a few days. Okay. So when they did test me the first day, and I thought that they had misunderstood and just gave me the normal test anyway. Instead, the first day, they gave me the a 100. So when I got the results back, I'm thinking, this was the big marker test they were talking about. Because, yeah, there's hardly anything here. But, yeah, not realizing it wasn't the one eighty one. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. But you've measured the the POI four. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. All the time. I'm I'm on the longevity world. You're like minus 16. Yeah. Yeah. Nice. It it does seem like minus fifteen, sixteen is the point where, the very healthy people are, like, maxing out. Of course, there are minus 20 at the very top, but Yeah. Yeah. That's minus 15 ish. Yeah. That's that's influenced by the chronicle hitch. Right? Because, like, the delta between It is. So, like, if you are 60, it's more realistic to be achievable, minus twenty year reduction compared to yours. 29 or 25. Like, you you you get a balance of age of five, which is gonna takes you really difficult. The third place on the launch of YouTube World Cup is minus, is 0.4 years old Okay. In female age. What? 0.4 years old? Oh, no. It's a logical age. 20. That's funny. Yeah. Honestly, with the epithelial limitations. Yeah. He doesn't look like a baby. I'm so sure so. So when I got my VO two max test here, I was so disappointed because I scored low. Mhmm. It was only after I pointed out to them that I scored low that they thought, that doesn't make any sense. And they looked at the test, and they realized they had when they typed in my age, they put me as age four. So I was low for a four year old. Yeah. I guess that was okay for me. So Yeah. You're 53 now. Yeah. Wait. So VO two max gets input ages as an input? Apparently. Case of the heart rate, zones and stuff. Yeah. Which I had them set mine twenty years younger, so I don't know where the four came from. Yeah. Probably on my DEXIS scan, I'm I turned out I'm 19.6 years old. Okay. That's okay. I've never seen a DEXIS scan that gave an age before. Right? Yeah. You just gave you a age in the Texas scan. Yeah. I didn't see that. That was weird. Did you see it? No. Just But I didn't look at that carefully, so I looked at the markers of interest for me. Yeah. Because we this is, like, my forward Texas scan. So Mhmm. What do you think about the block? Yeah. A lot of them most of them I've get tested, before. It's it's it's nice to, you know, have something to to to to kinda review, to see where I'm at. And the doctor, that's the best thing. The doctor, you spent an hour or even longer going over over results with the doctor. And she's very knowledgeable and and and very good, and she gave me some good recommendations. Yeah. Like, catching iron kind of, you know, insufficiency or, you know, almost efficiency. It's nice to to to catch that. And then, hormones and then the the lipid panel. So there are a few things that they were able to catch, and then we can work on plans to address it. And it it's, yeah, it's good. Because that's a problem with, just going along and thinking that you're doing all the right things, that you're eating healthy, you're exercising, you're are sleeping. So everything should be fine. Right? Sure. But not necessarily. You know? There could be all kinds of blind spots. Mhmm. So it's it's I'm glad that we we caught some, and and there's still, results that are pending. I'm still waiting for the microbiome. Right? And I can give you yeah. They're gonna give you recommendations of what, what what probiotics may be missing and what what kind of bacterial strains. And the true diagnostic test. Yeah. The true diagnostic and the genetic. Is it the DNA test. Yeah. Yeah. Those will arrive in a few weeks, so it's explosive. Yeah. Oh, omega three tests? That's also gonna come in a few weeks. Yeah. The omega three index. Mhmm. Yeah. I mean, that's a, like, a very good marker or important marker. So, very consistently associated with the longevity, higher omega three index. I think they left no stone unturned. They really pretty covered everything. Yeah. That's I think the beauty of it all is if you see you take just the general blood panel, you see, oh, I have some information. The next question is why, and we're talking about the time savings. So now you go, you look at your omega three index, you look at your gut microbiome results, you look at your true diagnostics. Is there something in, like, epigenetic aging? So you can already start finding out what's the pattern and where might the high CRP or high onomycin stain or whatever come from. So you already have the clues. So that takes a lot of time and energy, and I think that the stress, if we talk about the psychological aspect of focusing or hyperpulsing a marker, then you can kinda see the marker. And, of course, the first question in your mind is what's causing this? And you don't have to start thinking the next steps and spend so much time and mental energy about that. You have so much more to look at afterwards. Yeah. How you can always, like, investigate deeper based on additional tests here with Mhmm. Additional markers. These are all tests that I would have done anyway over the course of the year. I wouldn't probably would not have done the, full body MRI every year. I probably would have done every other, same with the coronary calcium CT score. But, it was just so nice to be able to do them all here conveniently, very cheaply, and just get it all out of the way in early January. Yeah. So Yeah. Done in a stress free way. Very stress free. Anywhere. Yeah. Guided and yeah. In a pampered way. Right. Yeah. Always someone, what accompanying you to the test and stuff. Mhmm. Yeah. So when we mentioned it was a DEXA scan. So I think a lot of people are gonna talk about blood tests, but, for body composition, DictoScan is probably the best gold standard test. So it measures muscle mass, fat mass, visceral fat mass, and bone density. So, yeah, your muscle mass and visceral fat mass are more accurate to measure with the MRI. DexoScan's pretty good, but it's a bit more accurate with an MRI. But the bone density is, the best with the DexoScan. And I think, that is a very underrated test. So bone density doesn't get talked about that much, but as you get older, you know, it's one of the leading causes of death for older people. So falling and, breaking a hip to to low bone density. So it's very good idea to preemptively, you know, know whether or not you have low bone density or not so that because it takes a very long time to improve bone density. You're not gonna change your bone density. It's gonna have weeks or months. It's gonna take several months and, years to significantly improve it. So the earlier you know what you're based on, especially after the date of 30 before that, it's not the most important thing. But, after you're 30, that's when it starts to decline more. So, getting some baseline reading of your bonus is gonna be a pretty good idea. And it's, you know, something that you can do in most big cities in the world, and it's not costing that much. It's, I think, maybe a 100, 200, $300 dollars, per scan. Just so even if you're not gonna do, like, a full MRI, then, regular data scan every once in a while. It can be viewed at, yeah, like, let's say every once every few years depending on what was the initial result. Yeah. But you still have to make yourself contact a doctor's office and get it set up and go get it done, which is why all these years I still haven't had it done yet. And I remember going to health, like, conventions, and they had oh, there's a Texas camp, but then there were lines, and I got busy. So and I didn't get it. So I never got it done because there's a little bit barrier. Right? You have to make an effort and you have to do it, and which is why it's so nice. The wild bean peppered is all done. So yeah. And then I've it's nice that I find out well, generally, it's very good, but there's one spot that it could it's maybe could be improved. It's a little less dense than other areas. Now I know I have areas improved. Otherwise, I'm just a black box that I think I'm good. Right? You know, there's no reason I'm not good. So then I didn't know. And then now I know, and then Dave has such a high score, and Dave is the one that inspired me to get a trampoline. And I think the trampoline probably did a lot of good for him. So now I was like, okay. I'm gonna jump on that trampoline a little bit more, increase my density. That definitely helped. Yeah. I also have a mini trampoline, and it really helps. So I have had dental scans quite regularly within the past few years. And the first one, my bone density wasn't the best. And now it had gone up since then four to 11% depending on the area. That's why it still needs some work. But, otherwise, I'm pretty happy with where it's going. And I have a mini trampling as well. And we like it. Last month, there was a published research, like, a meta analysis about postmenopausal BMAN that the vibration plate is very effective when combined with certain supplements, including vitamin d and k, that combination. And, surprisingly, in that study, they they found out that exercises like tai chi was even more effective than in this context than resistance training, which is also very effective. But Yeah. I didn't get enough time to read the why something like Tai Chi would be effective for bone density. That is interesting. Very surprising. Yeah. Right. Because there's no impact. Yeah. But the vibration plate made a a lot of sense Yeah. With the nutrients. And being a runner too. You're pounding the pavement. That that really helps build the density. Being fat as well, by the way. That's why I'm not worried. Yeah. Yeah. You're carrying the extra weight like a weighted foot. Yeah. Weighted west. Extra weight. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Weighted west. That's Is that absolutely. Would that make an impact on your bone density? Oh, no. No. Like, yeah, I have interesting case where my spine has, like, insanely high phonemes. It is at three standard deviations. So One. Which is, you know, this is normal on here with the spine. What you attribute that to? Well, I think that's because, probably because of doing a lot of heavy squats for twelve years. Okay. You're kind of bracing the back all the time. Yeah. And, but my hips are, you know, at 0.5 standard deviations above normal. It's still about normal, but it's much lower than the spine. Mhmm. It's kind of interesting, case that yeah. And I can see it from the DEXA scan. I mean, I don't need to work on my spine. I mean, you know, if I wanted to get my hips better, then that's what I should focus more. And maybe I should incorporate more, like, jumping and, plyometric style of his eyes to target the hips specifically. So I train a lot my back, but, you know, that's already very high bone density. So maybe, okay, if I wanna increase the hips, then I do specifically get this nice for hips, for example. But where's your highest bone density in your skull? Well, I didn't the skull. What are you trying to say? Oh my god. Oh my god. I don't know. Yourself. Yeah. Well, I mean, apparently, the head, everyone has a little bit higher than the rest of the body. You need to protect the brain a bit. But, yeah, I mean, there's no specials, the standard deviation score for the skull. It's only for the hips on the spine and the total body. I didn't know if you were doing, like, trampoline bouncing with your forehead or, like, how that would Yeah. Well, like, listening to the. That'd be my one. That's actually not good for your neck. Not good for your brain either. Yep. People got neck injuries from that. Yeah. I was at a, health con conference not too long ago where they had, a booth set up where they're doing manual, ultrasound bone density checks. And so I I got in and I paid for it, and I thought, this seems like bullshit to me, but okay. I'll watch. And I'm watching this just the the girl is just using an ultrasound very it's all manual. And at the end, she said, oh, yeah. You've got significant osteopenia. I'm like, really? You know, I'm thinking this is so full such bullshit. And then I went and, I started asking other people at the conference. I said, did you get that? Oh, yeah. Yeah. I've got osteopenia. I'm like, no. You don't. They've been telling everybody that. I think it's operator error. And so, you know, the tech I got my Jexa scan. And, I guess normally, with age, you typically lose what? Like, minus 0.6 in the index each year? And mine showed that I actually gained 1.3 over the past two years. So I was pretty pleased with that. No osteopenia. Yeah. At all. That's good. Yeah. Yeah. They do the Vio2max, and they give, prescription and physiotherapy. So, yeah, the physical component is very pseudo. They have a very good staff for focusing on mobility and, yeah, just the joint function. I tried the massage once when I came first time, but I haven't tried it since then. No. The Smashing down? Yeah. The Oh. What's called the deep myofascial Myofascial release. Oh, yeah. That's that's torture. Yeah. Yeah. I think that's why when you saw me walking and you said I looked like I was walking I think so? I'm pretty sure that's what that was from because they were really jamming into my hips. Yeah. But after that, you are, yeah, the the the lot more loose and Yeah. I was more sore. They did call me the posture posture assessment at that time, the first retreat before and after the myelofacial was released, And that already shifted the posture of it because it was tight patchy as I was holding my spine Yeah. Till that. Me as well, was probably a bit off. Like, my head was a bit forward. They did the stick a few minutes later, and it was a lot better. So, yeah, quick improvements. But, yeah, they also had some beauty or, like, aesthetic treatments here as well. It's a skin doctor and, dentist and eye doctor and all of other, doctors. Dave was getting, the beauty program, like, a full beauty program as well. I did. Yeah. Can you share how does the experience so far with that? Yeah. I did, microneedling of my face. I got, exosomes and PRN. I guess PRN's derived from salmon. Supposed to be very good for your skin. So I got that on, yeah, my face. I think they did part of my scalp as well. I I was falling asleep during the whole thing, so I'm not even sure what all they did. But it was yeah. Yeah. It's a weird weird feeling when they're doing the stamping of the microneedling Mhmm. Because it's such a really tight square pattern. And I don't wanna, like, scare anybody, but, you know, when they when they pull it away from your face, your skin comes away, like, a little bit and you hear the crunchy sound. It's like, wow. That's so bizarre. But it doesn't hurt. You know? And then they slather the stuff on, and it gets into the deep holes in your skin and Yeah. They might cause the rejuvenation. To be effective for collagen synthesis and Yeah. The salmon DNA also, they're similar, like, collagen and. You tried a few of the specific UV treatments. Mhmm. And then say about that. I've done quite a lot up here during the year. So I've done radio frequency microneedling, which microneedling I've done at home for years, and it's one of my favorite ways to penetrate actives into the skin, but also just cause this micro damage. So when we talk about the collagen induction, I think what often gets missed is the fact that skin is like an organ, and it we just eat collagen. There's not much road or repair happening just merely because of eating collagen. So same as you increase protein, but you also need to do resistance training to cause microinjury to be able to get that synthesis going. So I was eating collagen for, like, five years, and nothing really changed when I started microneedling with the collagen, eating collagen, and eating other nutrients to support the collagen synthesis like vitamin c or astaxanthinol and things that degrade Amino acids like proline and yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So those really help to kinda expedite the results from that one. Radio frequency is also something that can be used during with microneedling. I've done that couple times, but with the lasers, I'm being very cautious these days because it does cause some fat pad loss from the face. But here, what I appreciate is always so much who is currently I'm working with doctor Madhu here, and I always take her this idea. It's like try HIFO. Let's try Morpheus. And she's always like, okay. No. Not for you. Not yet. So he goes, like, very, very mildly, and I think that's what happens in in a base treatment event that people go too aggressive, too fast. So starting very mildly. I did salmon as well. So the polynucleotides, this was the first time that I did. Instead of microneedling, I did the injections this time, but it was very superficial at micro. So I did it yesterday, and you cannot see bumps. Can't tell. So yeah. So it was very, very superficial. I did that one and then the HydraFacial and those basic treatments. Just that. Yeah. Cool. Yeah. So it's, like, very easy easy to test these things here because they can do almost anything and, pretty fast as well. Yeah. Yeah. Doctor Joe, you've done, like, more exosomes and stem cell treatments as well. Yeah. In my own clinic. Yeah. So I didn't do it here. Yeah. But I'm I'm I'm asking, like, obviously, those things can be more effective than, some easier treatments like this ham and DNA. But, you know, how would you, I guess, rank them? What probably you think is, like, the most effective treatment for skin and teeth? I mean, just from what I've seen treating patients in my clinic, I think stem cells you know, I I don't have a you know, it's hard to compare stem cells, exosomes, and they both seem to work really well. Mhmm. But the case I have a few cases when I treated skin problems, the stem cell treatments have been just remarkable. I I think partially because not only the signals the stem cells are secreting because of the fact that they're living for a few months in your skin, they keep secreting factors that keep helping you break down scar tissue and regenerate. That's why the results are can be so profound because it's ongoing. So I I love, incorporating stem cells, but exosomes possibly can achieve very similar things. You you may just need more sessions. Yeah. But I think the technology, when you cause these micro damages, you can either count on your your skin's own ability to repair or you give it something extra you want. You can do it by supplements like collagen or amino acids, or you can give something that's really good, like peptides that that we know can trigger skin regeneration, or the next step of the exosome and stem cells. I think combination, you're gonna get the most fast results. Why do you think your skin looks so good? Well, thank you. So, well, I would attribute I I think the bulk of what, allows my skin to have the kind of elasticity it has is, is stem cell therapy, to be honest. But on top of eating healthy and, you know, I have a So you're not doing the HydraFacial and these things? No. I actually did HydraFacial the very first time here. I've never done a face not really. The sun's kinda like you just make your skin, like, shiny a bit, but it's not like Yeah. So I've never done HydraFacial. I feel like I I haven't really paid that much attention to my skin, to be honest, besides using the cream I created. You know, I I want a super healthy cream that that provides good protection barrier, but also penetrates deeply with nutrients. And that, you know, I've done, but not a lot of cleansing, not a lot of microneedling. I just haven't done that much. Mhmm. But I think the regular IV infusion of stem cells that rejuvenates everything from the inside out, including your skin. Right? It really it goes everywhere. And then, you know, I I've done I've done some more laser treatments. So in my clinic, we have this Fotona machine that uses laser to help create a micro DM. So I I did that, but I haven't done done it for a while. So I you know, out of the the last nine years that you've made sense on therapy that that I see my skin is getting better and better, and then it just kind of maintains. There's only maybe one year that I actually did the laser treatment. But most of the time, it just counting on the body's own rejuvenation and a good a good cream that constantly hydrates and protects and and helps with some rejuvenation. Yeah. That's that's really something. You know? Even the people that winter you, they like, you can still see in in your age. You can still see them at least at the very least, they're nice. You know? You can and your neck is perfect. Oh, there you go. I haven't done anything. So it's so crazy. Swaddling and such tears to back me. Oh. Well, thank you. You'll have to say that again when she was the king. I'm trying to. Good. Good. If I think this one is Under sure you enjoy it. Yeah. It's just taking a visible one. Yeah. Mhmm. Moments doing stuff. You know? And That's really nice. That's, like, the nicest, compliment. You know, like, the it's because You know when I were tear tear this before to you? Oh, she's sure that before. I've told her that before. I know a lot of people told me before. Are. Look at Dave's neck. Do I have turkey neck to have a waddle? You, yes. It's nice, but, you know, it's not comparable. I've never ever had a guy tell me my neck was nice before. Well, yeah. It's I don't even think I shaved this morning. You probably see a little gray stucco down here. Usually, there's, you know, some some sunscreen on the face, so the skin is not super tight, but Mhmm. You know, put sunscreen on the neck, just so that there's, like, sunspots and they're really really on Yeah. You need to have to wear your yeah. Hands and things like that. So Yes. The hands on the wrinkly chest usually show Yeah. Intense. I really have sound amazing too. Oh, thank you. Mhmm. Yeah. I I would say that's the power. I've never really done anything for my hands or my neck. But your red hot screen or something like that? So the stem cell eye cream, sometimes I put on my hands. Not the same. But yeah. The the regular stem cell because you could have stem cells topically or serially. I've done it maybe about two, three times maximum. So the IV, like, every three months I assume. That one is at like clock. Okay. Okay. Yeah. Because it it literally gives your body the signal to constantly repair. Right? The problem with our deterioration is that your body can't keep up with the little damages you just caused. So then it just stays. Right? The wrinkles and and and and the sagging. So if you constantly are repairing it, then it doesn't have a chance to to really degenerate to the point where you can see signs of aging. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. Due to due exosomes here. Yeah. Okay. But not stem cells yet. Yeah. I also did that actually as well, the exosomes. But just once, so I don't think it makes a big difference if you just do it once. Mhmm. I do exosomes fairly regularly, but once a quarter. Oh, cool. Club exosome in Las Vegas. Or a face or no. No. IV. IV. Okay. Yeah. And then if they have a little bit left in the vial, I have them drop it into my eyes. Oh, okay. They'll even, like, mist it up your nose if you want. Oh, my eye eye socket. Mhmm. Yeah. Like, like, putting in an eye droop. You know? It's just Does it improve your eyesight? No. Not that I've noticed anyway. Okay. Just not from just one time. Not from one time. No. It's just But I've heard people do pretty well, improved eyesight or just improved eye hydration. With the then you can put exosomes in a little eyedropper, and you just do it a few times a day. So if you do that, I think after a week, you you you would notice a difference. Wow. Understand. What other, interesting test you guys did? We did not talk about anything you obviously, all the things you haven't done before, but anything that is kind of interesting or was talking about. I'm trying to think of what we haven't already covered. Last time I did a, like, a comprehensive eye test. So I went to, like, a eye clinic, and, yeah, like, you're in this, like, black dot blue. It's like a white sheet of, screen or paper, and then you need to click if you see, like, a small flash. And some are easier to see, some are harder to see, and then you need to click and, you know, a lot of different tests, This does this. Do we have that here? It's not part of, the program. It's additional if you wanna get it. But I just had it done in December. So Yeah. Yeah. And, I did it, and it was it was a good thing. It was, like, a 100. Oh, it was one was 99. It was interesting. I was surprised, so I thought it's gonna be worse, but I actually clicked. I found that I've got, like, very mild cataract starting to form. It's starting to show my age. But they said that it's actually it can be caused by hyperbaric. Yeah. Yeah. The hyperbaric acute thing and worse in your eyes. And I noticed that when I was doing it last year, I did, like, a bunch of sessions. If I did three times a week, then I noticed my eyes was just getting super blurry in the evening. Yeah. And I was like, am I getting diabetes or something? I used to see GM for two weeks. Everything feels like, what? But, yeah, then I realized that it might be the Iberbaric gun when I started to recuse. And and you can use a carnosine eye drop. Like, it's called CAMC. Okay. And you can use those when they, dissolve the cataracts. So I've been using that to try to reverse that. Okay. There's always something for everything. Yeah. You can mitigate any problem. Mhmm. Can you actually, like, reverse the people who need need, Like, nearsightedness? Yeah. Yeah. Near or farsightedness. I'm about to find out. There was a there was a clinical trial that I wanted to get into. That's why I did the full medical grade eye exam. But when I was talking to, talking to my ophthalmologist, I mentioned to her a couple of experimental eye drops that Chad Chickpe T had told me about. And, she had been familiar with them, so she's kinda ordered those for me. So I'll be trying those. I'm I'm nearsighted, so my far vision is blurry. I can see good close-up. But, I can't wait to start trying the eye drops and see how much of a difference it'll make. Yeah. I mean, I eyesight will be probably able to fix in implicates, like, the old You think so? Yeah. Trials. David Sinclair's perspective, like, certain red light therapy treatments. Well, you know, David Sinclair's lab is doing complete regeneration device. Yeah. Like They'll destroy retina in mice, and they'll do the treatment and it, completely rejuvenates your eyeballs. Yeah. Yeah. So that's that's gonna be relatively easy to fix that in the next few decades. That's amazing. This is one of the most challenging days. And if they can do that for us, then they can do that for any organ. Yeah. So Basically. Yeah. Anything else can I talk about? No. I just really appreciate you putting this whole thing together and allowing us us all to come here and experience this. Yeah. And, also, I wanna mention the camaraderie, you know, the the friendship that's built. Yeah. You know, because we're all here. We all are looking at, you know, doing better for our lives. And it's you know, a lot of times, you know, people I see here is not just the health of the body, also health of mind, right, spirit, and and we share all that. And it's just really, really nice to just take the time and be able to talk with each other. Everyone's from a different country, working in a different industry. Everyone's so fascinating to talk to. I'm getting a lot of interesting perspectives that I don't, you know, get to hear. It's, yeah, what a rare opportunity and what a luxury. Yeah. I also find that with this social aspect here, like, one of the things that occurred me after we started organizing this, maybe not before the process that, when people come around such a personal topic, which is health and well-being, it can be quite intimidating, quite stressful as we were discussing. You get a lot of laughs. You don't really know what to do with them. What do they mean? Just to be surrounded by a peer crew that's going through the same thing, and they are very nice people, that they're very supportive people. Yeah. It makes this all quite fascinating rather than intimidating. So that's what I love the most here. But you're never left alone with anything, any worry, stress, any anything. You always have someone to talk to. And in normal health settings, when you get any news whatsoever, whether positive or negative, you don't always have someone to discuss it with or share it with. Right. So, yeah, the social aspect is pretty core aspect. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And you can, you know, the next day, go visit a group. Yeah. Mind you. If you decide to. And get so much sympathy. Right? How many people have asked you how you're doing? Like, all this love coming in our direction. You had a guy, the the hospital who was supposed to take care of it, whether they're Yeah. That was such a surprise. I didn't know they were sending somebody. He's fly everything. I fired him. Yeah. That's so bad. Yeah. I guess, we can then wrap it up. Where can people find you online? Yeah. So I have a channel in YouTube, the dash at I am Inkaland or Inkaland w c. It's channel name. In Instagram, it's I am Inkaland, and my website is inkaland.co. So people can find me on YouTube, just, Joy Kong MD. So people just put my name there, Joy Kong, k o n g. And, people can also find me on Instagram at doctor underscore joy underscore kong. And, yeah, those are the the two main places. On my website, people can also find me. Just joykongmd.com. Mhmm. Yeah. So forget about me. Just join the longevity word cup. Just tracking it. Yeah. Nice. You can find me on Instagram at dave.pasco. I have a website, davepasco.net. And, apparently, I have a YouTube channel that I haven't put any content out there for yet. It's, Dave Pascoe's URL is what it's called. And oddly enough, I have, like, over a thousand subscribers already waiting for me to put something out there. So you'll let me reproduce and put this on my channel. Like a collab. We can all collab in the same video as well. Cool. Yeah. I'll. So thanks for watching, and I'll see you next time. Yeah. And come to India with us. Yes.