Because everything is sped up in dogs and if we find, that there appears to be a risk factor in the environment that's increasing a particular kind of cancer, for example, we can then do a deep dive into people in that environment in a targeted way and ask if if there's a similar risk for people. Dogs that feed just once a day are also dogs that tend to have lower instances of gastrointestinal problems, pancreas problems. But there's an interesting challenge here. Doctor Daniel, welcome to the show. I'm really pleased to be here. Thanks for asking me. Yeah. I'm excited to have you on the show. Now, my podcast often talks about, you know, longevity and extending human lifespan, but, extending dog or a companion dog, a lifespan is also something I think a lot of people care about, especially dog lovers. And, you are involved with a very interesting project, which, you know, not only might help to extend a dog lifespan, but, you know, the lessons we learn from there might also be applicable to humans as well. So, yeah, very excited to dig into the research that you're doing. But, yeah, maybe we can start with, you know, what is the dog aging project, and, how did you get involved with that? So the the dog aging project is a long term longitudinal study of dogs all across The United States. We have enrolled over 51,000 dogs since we launched in 2020, and these are companion dogs or pet dogs in people's homes. And most of what we do for our research is observational. So we collect a lot of data, massive amounts of data, which we then use to understand what makes some dogs healthier agers than others. Why do some dogs stay healthier longer than others? What are the environmental factors, the genetic factors, the the biological factors, and, what are the underlying mechanisms by which genes and environment influence how long a dog lives. And then about one percent of the dogs in the study are also enrolled in a clinical trial to see if rapamycin can increase healthy lifespan at dogs. And how it got started is a bit of a long story, and I'll try and try and be brief. So way back in 2007, a paper came out on size in dogs from Elaine Ostrander's group. And in humans, if you think about the genetics of size, there are probably hundreds of genes that each contribute a tiny little bit to determine overall whether we are average height or taller or shorter than average. That's true in dogs as well, but there's one gene in particular which accounts for about half of the variation in size. If you have one form of that gene, two two copies of one form of that gene, you tend to be a toy breed. And if you have the other form in two copies, you tend to be a giant breed. And that gene is IGF one or insulin growth factor one. When that paper came out, I was immediately excited because we know that the pathway that that gene acts in IGF one insulin signaling, is thought to be important for aging in many different species in the lab, in mice and worms and flies, and possibly even in humans. And so that paper came out and immediately I wanted to answer the question of whether that gene is the reason that we see this really striking pattern in dogs that's different from what we see across species, which is that the large breeds are shorter lived than the small breeds. And, we're still trying to answer that question and a million other questions, and that led to creating this project with my cofounders Kate Creevy, who's now at Texas A and M, and Matt Caberline, who was at the University of Washington when I moved there and and now is, CEO of a company, OptiSpan, and we continue to work together. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. That's very, interesting, this relationship between body size as well as, in in humans is also related to height of how yeah. Like, a shorter, I guess. So it's interesting that, you know, that I think the the the relationship is that, you know, larger species tend to live longer than smaller species, but smaller individuals in that species live longer than the larger individuals. So, like, whales live longer than mice, but smaller whales tend to live longer than larger whales, if that's correct, or, like, humans. Larger humans tend to live shorter than shorter humans, but humans live short longer than the mice, for example. Yeah. So we've got pretty so the clearest pattern is actually in dogs. There's a twofold difference between really long lived, breeds like a toy poodle or a Havanese, and then a very short lived breed like a Great Dane, for example. And they're they differ in size by could be 50 fold and in life lifespan by two fold. We see these big effects in mice that many of the mutations that increase lifespan make these mice smaller. And then in humans, there's some support, there's some suggestion that that shorter people, have lower rates of cancer. The there are so many different contributing factors in humans to heart disease and cancer and so on. That it's not a really clean effect, but there's a bit of an effect that that smaller people are protected from some diseases. It's complicated too because there there are other data suggesting that taller people might have some benefits in terms of things like socioeconomic status. So it it's we we are a complicated species, and that's part of the reason why dogs are such a great model. Yeah. Yeah. And, one good thing about dogs as well. I'm I'm like a dog person, so I like dogs. I've had dogs all my life. But, you know, dog ownership is also associated with longevity in humans. So, you know, it's a bit not selfish in that sense, but, you know, you if you extend your dog lifespan, then, you might have also some benefits on your own lifespan. But at the same time, you know, you love your dog, so you want them to live as long as possible. So it's kind of a net, positive for everyone, I think, to research, this. And, like, why why why do you think is the reason why dog ownership might be associated with, longevity in humans? It's a a great question. And in fact, for years, I've been trying to convince, someone who runs a large human cohort study to add a matched cohort of dogs that belong to the people in the study. If you think about studies like the the light and longevity study in in The Netherlands or the, Framingham Heart study in Massachusetts. There are studies around the world. We we we know so much about the people in those studies, their environment and their biology. And it would be really amazing to study the same thing in those dogs, and that would allow us to test one hypothesis, about the the factors in the environment that might influence human longevity. The challenge and I'll I'll get back to your question. But the the challenge with understanding lifespan in humans from these long term longitudinal studies is that we live so long. And there might be environmental factors which we experienced in our childhood that impact risk of disease fifty, sixty, seventy years later. And we have studies now like Framingham, which started in 1948, where we've we've been studying people that long, but they're they're challenging long expensive studies. Because everything is sped up in dogs, we have the opportunity, for example, to understand how environmental factors might influence lifespan in a dog. And if we find, that there appears to be a risk factor in the environment that's increasing a particular kind of cancer, for example, we can then do a deep dive into people in that environment in a targeted way and ask if if there's a similar risk for people. In terms of why it is that that dogs are beneficial for people, and anybody who has a dog can answer the the most obvious part of that question, which is that they just make us feel good, that we enjoy having them in the environment. It's interesting to think about we you know, there are lots of people who have who you've spoken with on this podcast who are thinking really hard about discovering and implementing gero therapeutics, pharmaceutical interventions that might dramatically increase health span in humans. We already know about the factors in our lives that help us live longer that aren't pharmaceutical. So healthy diet, regular exercise, good sleep hygiene, avoiding too much alcohol, or addictive drugs, smoking, and then, good healthy social interactions. And if you think about how a dog might influence some of those things, we do know that people with dogs are more likely to get regular moderate exercise, taking their dog for a walk. And the other thing that I'm really interested in, and we don't yet have good data, but I would love to see someone study this, is we do know that regular social interactions help us live healthier longer, and having a dog around might could be a part of that. So it might just be that our mental health is better, and certainly our mental health is tied to our physical health. And so maybe having a dog around longer around us helps our mental health and our emotional health, and that helps us live longer. But I'm speculating. I would love to see someone study that. Yeah. I mean, the most obvious explanation could be that, you just go for more walks and you're more physically active. But, yeah, I do agree that there might be some, social or mental health benefits from the, you know, destressing benefits of the dog or the the love hormones, the oxytocin and these bonding hormones that, you know, might lower stress and. Yeah. And and we what we have seen, there are many people who are doing studies on the ability of companion animals to improve quality of life, for older people in, in long term care facilities, for example, or with people who have, cognitive deficits, dementia. Many studies have shown that they feel better by having companion animals for him. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices, which are the Bond Charge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes. They do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin antiaging, hormone optimization, pain management, and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes, especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the Bond Charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most regular Therapeuticizers don't have the right wavelengths of light, which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Boncharge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research, and they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code SIIM, s I I m, for a 15% discount. In humans, we know pretty much that the lifestyle fundamentals like, exercise, sleep, eating a healthy diet, etcetera, these are very important. They're like a foundation to longevity. Is it the same case in dogs? So, like, you know, obesity is bad for dogs. Poor diet, I would presume, would also have, like, similar effects in dogs. It it is. Although, one of the reasons that we're doing the dog aging project and and one of the things that I'm really excited about is we have the ability to to answer the the very questions that you're asking, with a a kind of resolution and statistical power that we haven't had until now to the the challenges that a lot of what we know, we know from cross sectional studies. These are studies where we just take a slice in time. We take a bunch of people or a bunch of dogs. We measure their health, and we and we, examine their diet, and we ask if healthier people have a better diet or healthier dogs have a better diet. But to really tease apart cause and effect, we need to carry out long term longitudinal studies where we go back in time and look at when everybody was healthy, what were they doing? And then did that impact how they aged? And doing that in people takes a long time as we talked about. In dogs, we can follow a dog from middle aged to geriatric depending on the breed in about five years. And so there's there's real power to that. We do know and there's there's really good data from the veterinary literature that obesity, for example, is a risk factor in dogs for all kinds of of morbidities for many different kinds of diseases. Although, interestingly, dogs are protected from some really important diseases that are associated with obesity in humans. In particular, they don't get cardiovascular disease, so they don't get heart attack or stroke. Although they do get dementia, they get other kinds of heart disease, valve mitral valve disease, cardiomyopathy. And then the other thing that they're protected from is type two diabetes, although they do get type one diabetes. But there are many issues, with obesity in dogs. One of so in many ways, dogs are really powerful translational model. One of the things that we see a lot of in older dogs is challenges with musculoskeletal health. Osteoarthritis, sarcopenia, loss of muscle mass, and with something like osteoarthritis, obese dogs struggle more with it than lean dogs. So that that's really important. The diet is, really an open question, and and there aren't a lot of studies where people have compared very different kinds of diet, like the the standard kibble diet, the dried extruded food that most dogs eat compared to raw food diets or frozen diets, commercial frozen diets versus homemade raw or frozen diets. We have those data because we've got diet data on tens of thousands of dogs. We're following them longitudinally. And my hope is that a few years from now, we will have studied these dogs for enough years that if we look at dogs starting from a young age and following them throughout their life on these different diets that we will begin to see which diets are associated with longer or shorter health span, different kinds of disease. So I don't have good answers for you yet, but Right. We do have the dataset that's gonna help us get there. So I'm pretty excited about that. Mhmm. That's the other thing that I would add is we we have identified lots of environmental factors associated with health and lifespan. But in addition to that, for the 50,000 dogs, 51,000 dogs in our study, we have whole genome sequencing for 7,000, and we have a deep dive into the molecular biology of these dogs for about a thousand in a group that we call the precision cohort within the dog aging project. PAC is what we call the whole group. And within those dogs, we've got longitudinal data. So every year, we've got data on the epigenome, the microbiome, the metabolome. We have we use flow cytometry to characterize their immune phenotype. We have complete blood counts and blood chemistry. And the power there is that in addition to identifying the genetic or the environmental factors that are associated with health and lifespan, we can get at the mechanisms. And then that can take us back into the lab to validate those things in the in the model organisms like mice or worms or flies. Mhmm. Interesting. Yeah. You mentioned the diet. Is there any, I guess, directions you think would lead to longer lifespan in, dogs in terms of, like, diet? I mean, in humans, there's there's some principles obviously that, appear to be better, like mostly eating whole foods and minimally processed foods. But is there any anything similar in dogs? We don't know yet. We so one of the it it's hard to measure diet. So what we don't have is we have we haven't actually collected foods from individuals and process them in a chemistry lab to to measure protein content, fat content, carbohydrate content, and so on. Most of the dogs in our study most of the people in our study give their dogs kibble, and they tell us what kind. And so we will be able to look at components, of those diets in more detail. We haven't done that yet, but that's certainly something that we're excited to do. Okay. And then we we just, did a study. So we're one of the things I love about the dog aging project is that it's team science. So, I am not the dog aging project. There are about a 100 people who work on it and researchers around the country. One of the teams recently published a paper looking at the diets of, dog diets, from households where the people are making the diet. And what's interesting and a little bit concerning is that often it appears that there are micronutrients that are missing from some of those Mhmm. Homemade diets. And, my hope is that by publishing research like that, we can help people who want to give their dogs a homemade diet, make sure that they're adding whatever, supplements are needed to ensure that that all the nutrients that are required nutrients are present in the diet. But what the long term health consequences are of the different diets, it's it's we don't know yet. It's a little premature. But as we continue to follow these dogs, we'll be able to ask that question. Mhmm. Yeah. I've also seen, I think, one study where they saw some aspect of intermittent fasting or this, confined eating window had some positive effects on, dog lifespan. So, like, eating less less frequently. Yeah. So, this is really interesting and and, it's sort of a good lesson in how we think about study design as well as how we think about feeding frequency. So, fairly early on, we've we've now published about 80 papers and there are new papers coming out every month. Fairly early on, we published a paper led by a researcher, at the University of Arizona, Emily Bray, looking at the difference between, health patterns in dogs that feed just once a day and dogs that feed two or more times a day. There are many people who who give their give their dog all of their food at one time in the day, and then other people who, will leave out food. There are some dogs that are very food motivated, and they'll try and eat anything. And so you kinda have to control what they eat or they will become obese. And others like the the dog that is, sitting right next to me on the ground here who's not very food motivated, and we just leave food out all day, and he'll pick at it if he feels like it. What Emily and her colleagues found was that dogs that feed just once a day are also dogs that tend to have, lower instances of, gastrointestinal problems, pancreas problems. But there's an interesting challenge here, and that is so that was a cross sectional study. And we don't know in a cross sectional study where we just look at a slice in time and we ask, what do the dogs eat and how's their health? We don't follow them over time. We don't know which way the causal arrows go. And, from the the anecdote that I like to tell here is, about our previous dog, Frisbee. When Frisbee was a 45 pounder, roughly 20 kilo dog, so medium large sized dog. She lived to 16, which is for a dog for a 20 kilo dog, that's a long lifespan. She was a really healthy dog until 14. And at 14, she started to have a lot of age related challenges. That's one of the reasons that dogs are good model for human aging. They struggle with what we call multimorbidity. Lots of different things happen as they age. And in particular, when she was 14, she had, an acute bout of pancreatitis, which she almost died from. And one of the things when we took her into the clinic and they diagnosed her with pancreatitis, the veterinarian, said initially, I was gonna have to start making a special, easy to digest diet for her. It was not a complete diet, but it was just temporary, and that was a diet of, cooked oats, sweet potato, and chicken breast. But also that I needed to give her small meals. If I if she ate too much, that could put a stress on her pancreas and it could kill her. And so it's possible that dogs with GI problems and pancreas problems are told not to eat too much at once, and whereas healthy dogs are not. And so we might not expect to see sick dogs having only one meal a day, which might make us think that having only one meal a day one meal a day makes dogs healthy. So we don't know that. The the cool thing is we're now at a point when I'm excited for someone to do this where we have enough longitudinal data that we can now go back and ask for the dogs who enrolled in 2020, who are all healthy, so we just limit it to the healthy dogs, take those that eat once a day and those that eat multiple times a day, and ask now five years later, are they different? So no one's done that yet, but I'm excited for someone to do that and which leads me to a really important message that I wanna give your listeners, which is that we are an open data study. And that means that all the data we collect, we make publicly available for academic researchers around the world. And, for corporate people who are interested in access to the data, we're happy to discuss that as well. So if there's someone out there who's interested in asking this question and is comfortable with managing large datasets that have many tens of millions of data points, let me know. I'd be happy for you to have the data and do science with it. That's cool. What about calorie restriction? So in pretty much others other, experimental models, the calorie restriction does extend lifespan. Does it do so in, dogs? We have a little bit of information there that is positive that suggests that calorie restriction does, improve lifespan in dogs, but it's a little bit problematic. So the the one long term study, lifetime study, with calorie restriction in dogs was done by Purina, and they had a a group of dogs in kennels that they followed over time with some more calorie restricted and some were not. And, the ones that were calorie restricted live live longer. The one problem with the study is that the ones were not calorie restricted more were more likely to struggle with obesity. And the obesity led to morbidities, which in some case, to alleviate suffering led to euthanasia of the dogs. And so it's a little bit hard to know whether because, at least in this country in The US, when a dog reaches its end of life and and can't do its daily activities, is really suffering, common outcome here in The US is is euthanasia for dogs. And so it's hard to know with that particular study whether the calorie restriction really slowed the aging process or whether it was really the the ad lib diet that led to problems with obesity and and euthanasia. So and if I were to do that study again, I'd be interested in, like, the work that some of your listeners might know from John Speakman. He did this beautiful study years ago where he did graded caloric restriction in mice, ten percent, 20%, 30%, 40%, and looking at it, how that affected health and lifespan and the molecular biology in mice. So I'd love to see a study in in dogs where it's not just ad lib versus caloric restriction, but sort of healthy weight versus a little bit less than than normal calories, sort of like the the calorie study in humans that that you might know of. Mhmm. Yeah. I mean, at least it will help to combat some obesity if if, the dog is overweight, then the calorie restriction will help to, reduce that. But, yeah, I guess it's hard to know, similar to humans, it would be hard to know if it does extend lifespan because we live relatively a bit longer compared to mice or, yeast, for example. But, you know, I think I think, you know, one challenge with calorie restriction in humans is that no one really wants to do it. It's very difficult to do for the rest of their life. But I guess, you know, you could do it with your dog, since they can't really go to the store and buy foods, which I guess, you know, then brings out the, you know, ethic problem, with, quality of life for your dog. It's, And I I would not advocate, people imposing calorie restriction on dogs. In in the veterinary world, and I should say I'm not a veterinarian. I'm a a PhD trained scientist. But in in the veterinary world, we talk about body condition. In The US, it's typically graded on a a one to nine point scale where five is considered optimal. And, and until now, anyway, the best information that we have is that the optimal body condition for a dog is five, which is not caloric restriction. So I'm not advocating that people impose caloric restriction on their dogs. No. Keep it down. It's an interesting scientific question whether, a dog being calorically restricted would improve its long term health. But other than the the PUREENA study, I think we we just don't know enough to say one way or the other. Yeah. You mentioned also exercise as well as, orthopedic problems, musculoskeletal problems. So exercise, obviously, in humans will help to counteract those, conditions. In dogs, I I I do see that, yes, you know, you can do a lot of cardio with dogs. You can do running up the stairs and those kind of things, but, you know, you can't really lift weights with your dog, to counteract the bone bone mass loss. So are there any ways, any kind of devices, any gadgets, or some exercise equipment that or some ideas of how to, you know, do resistance training for your dog to maintain muscle and bone density? That's a a terrific question. I I don't know the answer. I'd be surprised if there aren't. I will say that the the one exception to this, which is really a a extraordinary and extreme exception is sled dogs, which, have a phenomenal cardiovascular capacity. Just off the charts beyond that. They are really, beyond anything that we see in in the human species. And what's striking is not only are they able to maintain, a high level activity, for many, many hours? But, also, they're pulling a sled, and and so they're being challenged in terms of, just strength, musculoskeletal challenge. So, I don't know the answer to whether there anyone has thought about this. I I have heard of people, trying in the lab, for example, to to have lab animals, like, pulse, to to pull something. Whether this would help a dog or not, I don't know. Certainly, there are many different kinds of sports that that people participate in. And even not just, you know, the the amazing sled dogs. There are many dogs that do skijoring, for example, which is a combination of a a human on on cross country skis and a dog pulling them. And I think that would probably be a great exercise in terms of both strength and endurance for dogs. Agility training, is great for endurance, but also for movement and balance and probably cognitive function as well. So I think there there are a lot of things that people can do to keep their dogs active, and and there are certain dogs that just, love doing these sorts of things as well. Yeah. Yeah. Like, certain speeds are crazy for the exercise. Yeah. But the slit dog, yeah, that that is very interesting that, you know, you do they do, I guess, use their muscles pretty much for many hours and, you know, it certainly does, you know, at least build muscle tissue. I'm not sure if it will build, like, a bone density, but, yeah, for muscle tissue, it does does so. You know, we mentioned all these, like, lifestyle factors and armament factors. The dog aging project also has a very interesting, I guess, one part of the project is you're using rapamycin for, testing if it will extend lifespan in dogs. So rapamycin is, you know, notoriously extended lifespan in other species, and it's, like, a good candidate to do so in dogs and maybe humans as well. So, what is the result so far with, testing rapamycin? Yeah. So so it's the one, intervention study that we're doing. So I mentioned that we have 51,000 dogs that have enrolled, not all are still alive. And and then our target for the rapamycin study, which we call TRIAD, that stands for test of rapamycin in aging dogs. Our target is to enroll 580 dogs. Half of them on rapamycin and half on placebo. So we're we're running at just like, one would run a human clinical trial. It's a double blind placebo controlled study. So we don't know which dogs are getting which drug nor do the owners, and and half are getting a placebo. In addition, there are two arms to the study. So about half the dogs are in a cardiac arm. We know from mice, for example, that rapamycin improves cardiac heart function at late age. It makes older mice, hearts look younger, giving them low dose rapamycin. And so one arm is looking at rep at heart function in dogs. Those dogs go in every six months and have an echocardiogram. So we're really doing serious analysis of heart function. And then the other arm is, cognitive arm looking at neurological function in dogs every six months. The dogs are on rapamycin for one year, and it's a low dose once a week treatment. And we're, you know, obviously, it's important to keep in mind that people in The US think of dogs, and in many countries, think of dogs as a member of the family. This wasn't the case seventy five years ago. Perspectives on companion animals have really changed over time. And now people consider the dog often a family member, and so we're very, cautious about what we're doing. If anything, we're airing on the side of of too low a dose because we don't wanna cause problems. We don't wanna do harm. So these dogs are on either rapamycin or placebo for a year, and then we follow them for an additional two years. And the primary outcome is survival at the end of that three year period, and, and then secondary outcomes of heart function and cognitive function. I should mention that we are still enrolling. The dogs have to be, at least seven years old and at least forty pounds. So middle aged large breed. And we're we have sites all around the country. And so if any of your listeners are interested in being a part of this study, and I have to say this is the first time that anyone has ever done a real world study looking at the ability of a gerotherapeutic drug to increase lifespan. Problem isn't, you know, we we live too long in humans to do something like that. We can do it in the dogs. It's a really exciting study. We we have a and we treat it just like a human study through NIH, through the National Institutes of Health. We have a data and safety monitoring board, and so everything is is very carefully done. So what do we know so far? Because it's a double blind study, we don't know what the dog which dog is on placebo and which dog is on the drug, and we won't unblind ourselves until the study is over. The study will be over when we've enrolled all the dogs that we wanna enroll 580, and we have followed each dog for for three years or until the end of its life if that comes sooner. And and so, in fact, I would say that the sooner people like your listeners enroll in the study, the sooner we get to 580 dogs, the sooner we'll have an answer for you. Our, our preliminary data from smaller studies, the first study we did actually showed some improvement in heart function. It was too short as a study to look at lifespan. And then the second study, showed, a good safety profile. So we aren't we're not seeing adverse events, which is great. And so we're excited for more people to enroll in the study. We have sites all around the country. It's, doesn't cost the participant anything to enroll, and they get outstanding care. So if anyone is interested, you can, click the link on the dog aging project website at dogagingproject.org and and learn more. So we we don't have answers yet. We are there are things that we can do in terms of looking at molecular signals in in in dogs that look like the dogs that are enrolled in triad, large breed, middle aged dogs. And so that's something that we're doing to try and understand. So we have a study, for example, where we're going to be looking at markers of cognitive dysfunction in dogs. Really interestingly, and, unfortunately, dogs, when they hit 11 or 12 years old, they begin to be at risk of a disease that looks a lot like Alzheimer's disease. It's called canine cognitive dysfunction. And it's the motivation for that neuro arm in the rap in the triad study, to test whether rapamycin can delay or decrease the impact of canine cognitive dysfunction. We've already done some studies, published some papers looking at the molecular markers that we see in people with Alzheimer's, things like, a beta and phospho tau, these molecules that accumulate in the brain. Do we see them in dogs? We do. Does that mean that dogs are getting Alzheimer's disease? That we don't know, but we're really interested in in figuring out all the ways in which can and cognitive dysfunction or CCD in dogs is like Alzheimer's in humans, which will then give us this very powerful model to test ways to to address Alzheimer's disease. As as you know, we don't have a treatment for this disease, which as people are living longer and longer, it's become more and more common. It's just a a very serious problem, that we we don't have treatments for. And and to the extent that CCD is like Alzheimer's disease, we might even be able to discover treatments from dogs that we can then translate to to help people. Yeah. That's super interesting. Yeah. I I if I was in US, I would probably also enroll my own, our our own dog, to the project as well. But, yeah, you know, it was one of those questions, I was waiting for, you know, to decide if I'm gonna give my own or our our own dog, reptomycin. So, yeah, looking forward to those results. It's a really good question, and it's really important to stress to your listeners that the reason that we do clinical trials, is to test whether something is helpful or neutral or harmful. And Mhmm. We don't know the answer until the clinical trial is finished. So many people have reached out to us and said, where can I get rapamycin and how much should I give my dog? And the answer is, we don't know yet. We are so excited about the study and what we're going to find. We need to be patient, and and the participants appreciate that what that that it takes a long time to learn about the effects of drugs. These are hard earned lessons, and and the beneficiaries of of the triad trial might not be the dogs enrolled in the trial, they might be the next generation of dogs. So we just need to be patient. But if people are interested in being a part of geroscience, of the science of aging, this is a a terrific way to be a part of it. And I should mention that we're also enrolling we continue to enroll people just in our observational study of now 51,000 dogs. And and, again, if they go to the dog aging project website at dogagingproject.org, they can find out how to enroll. It's still just limited to to The United States. We would love, to expand to other countries, and that's just a question of of funding and collaborators in other countries. And, the the funding pieces for this kind of science is a real challenge. It's a very complex study, and, there's something for everybody to love in the study, but also because it's so rich what we're doing. But, also, when it comes to writing grants and having reviewers look at it, grant reviewers' job is to find weaknesses and grants. And so because it's so complex, there's also something for every reviewer not to like. So we've had lots of funding challenges. We we have a a major grant that will be reviewed in a couple months at the National Institutes of Health, and we're cautiously optimistic that that that will go through well. At the same time, it's led us to create a nonprofit, the Dog Aging Institute. And and that's been for us a great experience being involved in the nonprofit world, which is something that the cofounders, Matt and Katie and I had never done before. And so we have this nonprofit dog aging institute, and there's a team that runs that. And we're also using that to try and raise funds, not only for the dog aging project, but in general for people who are interested in using companion dogs as models for for aging research. There's just so much potential there. Mhmm. What's involved in, being part of the study? So what do they have to do something or keep notes or To to be part of the dog aging project, if you have a dog, you just go to the website dogagingproject.org and, sign up. And there's a survey, that has 10 parts, and each part is about a particular topic. So there's one just about the the dog demographics, its breed and size and sex and so on. There's another section about dog health. There's a section about the home environment and so on. 10 sections. And once you've completed all 10 sections, you become a member of the dog aging project, and your dog is given a a number and is a member of the pack. For those who are interested in being a part of the triad study, the rapamycin study, it's a little more complex. So the dog has to be at least seven years old, forty pounds. And if you enroll, a team member will then work with you to determine if your dog is eligible. The dog also has to be healthy. So we're we're testing the ability of rapamycin to help dogs maintain health rather than to cure problems. And so it's quite limited, and especially for the heart study, they need to have a healthy heart. For the neuro study, they have to have cognitive health. And if they are, if they fit all of those criteria, they will then be invited to one of the clinics in their region where they will be given either, a a standard exam by a veterinarian plus either a neurological study or an echocardiogram, and those studies are completely harmless. They don't there's no risk to those studies. And and then if they are invited to enroll, they will then be given either placebo or rapamycin. They won't know which they're given. And they will be followed for up to three years. And every six months, they'll bring the dog in for an exam. So they will their dog will be a deeply studied animal and at no charge. They don't pay for those exams. And and a lot of the information that we collect, and this is true of the dogs in the regular study as well. Like, if we in the precision cohort, for example, when we collect the blood counts, blood chemistry that are routinely done in dogs that go into the veterinarian if they're sick, We give that to the owners as well, as well as the the whole genome sequencing we do. We give them information about their breed and so on. Mhmm. So that the participants are really, community scientists. They are doing science with us. And how long do they need to keep taking the the pill? So they'll they'll take the pill either rapamycin or placebo for one year, and then we will continue to follow them for two more years. Okay. Good job. And I could just tell you my my my dog is my dog has very acute sensitive hearing, and he's whining in the background. I don't know if you can hear him because he must hear something that I don't hear. And he might start barking soon, and if he does, I apologize. That's fine. That's okay. Yeah. Are there any other compounds with potential, like, longevity benefits in dogs, like metformin or some other thing? Many people have come forward with interest in having us test other components like metformin, like acarbose. Doing one clinical trial turns out to be a a considerable challenge. And so we're not going to think about doing another one until, we've enrolled all the dogs in their in the triad trial. There are other people who are doing clinical trials in dogs. Most notably, a company called Loyal, led by Celine Haliewa is, testing several drugs. Their first drug was looking at, an intervention just in large breed dogs focused, really on the hypothesis that we talked about right at the beginning that may relate that gene IGF one or insulin growth factor one to lifespan. So the large breed dogs have this form of IGF one that that leads to large size, it may lead them to live shorter. We don't know for sure. Loyal is, testing a drug that reduces the expression of IGF one to see if those large breed dogs live longer. They have other drugs in trial that for that are for all dogs, and I don't know what mechanisms they're testing. So they're certainly working on that. And then there are other people out there who are interested in in things like gene therapy. That's not something, that I'm involved in. I think the, you know, the as we've talked about 99% of what we do, 99% of the dogs in our study are dogs that we are just watching. The as as one of our team members like to put it, the power of paying attention. And there's a lot that we can learn from that. For example, we have a paper that's just now coming out. I haven't seen the proof yet, but, the the the manuscript is is online at the Journal of Gerontology looking at biomarkers, that are in the blood, small molecules that we call metabolites, the levels of which are predictive of whether a dog is gonna survive for the next year or not. And it turns out, there are some molecules that if they're higher than average, the dog is more likely to survive. Others where if they're lower than average in a dog, the dog is more likely to survive. And the really cool thing is that it turns out that these particular molecules that are either positively or negatively associated with mortality risk are the same molecules that are associated in the same direction with predicting mortality in people. So just by watching dogs over time, following them over time, and measuring molecules in their blood, we can identify biomarkers that turn out to be the same biomarkers that we've already discovered in people. And that suggests that as we continue to work, we might discover new biomarkers of risk of mortality, for example, in dogs that aren't yet known in people, but which we could then go and test in people. So we're we're really excited about where we are now with papers, just coming out. We have these two metabolite papers that have come out, and then we have, an epigenome paper looking at not the sequence of the DNA, but the structure of the chromosomes. And that's, in the pipeline. Another one that's looking at the genetics of various traits in dogs. We have papers on the microbiome from, the gut. We use fecal samples to look at all the bacteria in the dog. So all of these molecular studies are coming out and the because everything is sped up so much in dogs, we have this potential to identify biomarkers of health span in dogs. And the really cool thing about that too is that if we find environmental factors, for example, that affect lifespan in dogs, we can then ask whether they impact the biomarker. And if they do and if that is the same biomarker in people, then we have a way to do studies in people where we don't have to follow them for their whole lives. We can just look at what the intervention does to the biomarker. Somehow a measure of aging. So we're now at a state in the dog aging project where these molecular studies are coming out, and and I think that's really taking us to the next level. I'm super excited about it. Yeah. Yeah. That's interesting that you mentioned that it's paired up in dogs. So there's, you know, the saying that one one year for dogs is, seven years for humans. So, you know, there are some a two year clinical trial in humans is, you know, considered a long one. In dogs, a two year would be, you know, fourteen year equivalent in humans. So you would actually get, yeah, like, much accelerated, results with, yeah. That that's right. And if you think about triad, if if you start, like, with a healthy eight year old dog and you follow that dog for three years, an 11 year old dog is starting to get into its geriatric years. And so you really are doing a clinical trial where you're following individuals from middle aged to geriatric years, and that's powerful. And doing that in humans, people have done it. Like with the Framingham Heart Study, it's not an intervention study, but following people from young adulthood or middle age to to old age and death. But that study started in 1948, and it's now on the third generation of the the grandchildren of the first people who enrolled. But it's it's taken, a huge investment from NIH and a huge investment of time in the people who lead that study. So so, yeah, a two year study in dogs could teach us what might be a fifteen or twenty year study in humans. And one of the things that we show in this paper that's now online at Journal of Gerontology, the data that we collected was over a period of less than a year and a half that allowed us to identify those biomarkers. And we compare it with eight different human studies that, lasted from anywhere from about eight years to about twenty years. So it took the the human studies a decade or more typically to find what we found in a year. Nice. We we our dog had, like, motion sickness. So he, he got, like, a nausea during driving. He doesn't get it anymore, but he last year or two years ago, he did. And we gave him one, this, no nausea medication, which, I think the active ingredient there was, meclizine, which is a antihistamine. And, I did a quick, Google search as well once, and, there is some data that the meclizine also extends the lifespan in the animals. So, yeah, are there any other kind of these, you know, maybe not not supplements necessary, but certain, I don't know, medications or some things like that that could also have potential besides besides rapamycin and metformin perhaps. Thor, this gets into an area that, many people in the geroscience community are thinking about. It's not something I'm working on as much, but many people are interested in the possibility that that drugs that are in common use might have what we call off label effects. Though, my own opinion on this is that it's certainly worth doing clinical trials on these sorts of things. I don't advocate individuals trying them out, without not as part of a clinical trial, but because so for example, we we actually have some data from fruit flies. I have in addition to to co leading the dog aging project, I have a fly lab where I study aging in fruit flies, and we do metabolomics. And some of our work has pointed to his the histamine pathway as a potential pathway in flies to make them live healthier longer. And we've so we're doing work in collaboration with Andrei Parkitko at University of Pittsburgh, to look at whether altering the the histamine pathway can make flies healthier longer, so we can give antihistamines to flies. But humans are not flies and humans are not mice. And so even if we see evidence that that medications that we give people for other things make animals in the lab live healthier longer, that the next step is not for you and me to start taking those drugs. There are considerable risks. The next step might be clinical trials, and and the dog is actually a great, intermediate as long as we focus on safety because we can learn things so much more quickly. So there may well be potential. And, you know, I think a great example, we can think of things like statins. You know, people take statins, not as a gerotherapeutic, but one can imagine a world where statins came out of a lab working on the biology of aging. Similarly, the GLP one agonists that are now being so commonly taken for people for weight loss appear to have lots of beneficial side effects in terms of other health domains. And, again, if GLP one agonists had come out of a lab working on the biology of aging, they might have called GLP one a gerotherapeutic. So which just raises the interesting question of of what a general therapeutic is as opposed to a standard medication like a statin or a GLP one agonist. So Yeah. There there's a lot there. I mean, I think we can have a conversation about this issue all day long. So I I think the bottom line is, yes, there's potential. I think there are ethical issues. It's really important that people not take a result from the lab and think that the message is that they should start taking that drug. The other thing that I think the geroscience community doesn't talk about enough is that and and this was something we talked about at the top of the hour. And that is we already have a whole set of interventions that are impactful and safe. We know, how to improve healthy lifespan with effects on lots of beneficial effects on lots of different parts of of our functions through diet, exercise, good sleep hygiene, avoiding too much alcohol, avoiding cigarettes, good social interaction. And one of the things that that I'd like to see more of in the in the geroscience community is thinking about how to maximize those things. And then it may be building on top of that, with the the new cutting edge discoveries that are that are coming out of geroscience labs around the world. Mhmm. Yeah. But what about regular supplements, like, I don't know, omega threes, some, other ones? Sure. Again, I think there, we should let the science drive decision making. So, if, you know, there there are more and more studies coming out about omega threes, for example. I'm not an expert in supplements, and so I'm not gonna say anything about this supplement or that supplement. What I will say is that there's lots of information online and there's lots of misinformation online. And I think what we really need to be careful about is making sure that if we're taking supplements, are the the beneficial effects of the supplements and the lack of risk factors for the supplements supported by the science? And if so, that's pretty good. But even, you know, there are there have been so many studies on vitamin e, for example. And we learned years back from European study that there were some risk factors of vitamin e that only showed up when with a sufficiently large study. And so, and and I guess the last thing I would say about supplement is, there's pretty good evidence for the beneficial effects of omega threes. I think probably the best thing we could do is build a diet that includes nutrient or foods rich in omega threes, which at the same time will ensure that we're not eating foods that are not good for us. Mhmm. Yeah. And in general, just having a a healthy diet is going to give us the nutrients we need. Sure. And and the same for the dogs then that they eat a kind of diverse diet with or the ones that give them adequate nutrients? There so there's lots of supplement use in dogs, and, what's missing so far is really good large scale, either clinical trials or observational studies. So, people give their dogs omega threes. A lot of people give their dogs, cosamine and chondroitin sulfate for musculoskeletal health. I'm hoping that the data that we have will help us really understand the potential benefits of those things. So I would say they're, like in humans, we need more data to really help us understand what we should be doing to optimize our health. But Okay. The potential to collect those data is there. Yeah. I guess, you know, the main takeaway for dogs is the same for humans that, you, you know, follow the fundamentals. And then in the next few years, we might have some new discoveries about what might actually lead to some, additional extension in, in lifespan in in both, dogs and humans. Yeah. I think, I mean, the dog aging project is just one study and there are others, that are trying to answer these questions. I think we're close. Certainly within, the lifetime of my career, I think we're gonna have some fundamental advances in understanding drivers of healthy lifespan in dogs, and that many of those will translate to humans. And a big shout out to the Golden Retriever lifetime study, which is another long term longitudinal study that is just in Golden Retrievers. They started before we did, and they're just about finished. The the last dogs are sort of in the late stages of their life, and we're we're going to be learning a lot from them. A lot from the dog aging project. There are some studies, in Europe, Finland, for example, studying to, epidemiological scale studies of dogs. So I would say to your listeners, stay tuned. Two to five years, I am confident that we're gonna have some some really major advances in our understanding of both causes and consequences of variation in aging, who lives healthier longer, and why. Yeah. And then we'll also learn some things for humans. I have no depth. Yeah. It's an exciting time. Yeah. Well, it's been a great talking with you. Thanks for joining the podcast. Before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and your work? And you can also say one more time where can if they wanna join the dog aging project. Yeah. Well, thank you so much for, inviting me. It's been a terrific conversation. I really enjoyed it. If you'd like to learn more about the dog aging project, you can go to dogagingproject.org. If you're interested in supporting it, you can go to dogaginginstitute.org. And if you'd like to learn more about my work, you can just Google Daniel Promislow or you could go to promislowlab.org and, learn more about what I'm doing. And, I'll be very interested to, hear more about, your your your listeners are are, interested in the dog aging project. I hope to see a bump in enrollment in the dog aging project following this. Yeah. Well, that's I hope so. And, my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you adopted sooner? So, I just started working with a trainer. So I've been very active my whole life. Lots of sports and running and skiing and going to the gym and so on. I've never done weight training. And, I just had a health issue. I had to work with a physical therapist, and it was a big wake up call for me at my age. One of the biggest challenges that we face, especially after the age of 60, but it starts around the age of 40, is loss of muscle mass. It happens to all of us. And we can combat it through exercise, especially through resistance exercise. And so I just started working with a trainer and I have to say I've never done resistance exercise, weight training before. I'm loving it. And, and it's really important for our long term health as we start losing muscle mass in our forties and then well into our sixties and seventies that speeds up. So, that's to for today, that that's my advice. Start, doing weights and and combating what we call sarcopenia or muscle loss, loss of lean muscle mass. Start doing it now and keep on doing it for the rest of your life. Yeah. Absolutely. And, get a slit for the dog. Yeah. Yeah. Thanks a lot for for the conversation. I really enjoyed it. Yeah. My pleasure, and, I'll see you around. Great. Bye bye.