Welcome back to the q and a episode. First question, what are some of the most important things that matter to health? There's obviously millions of things you can focus on, but what are the most impactful health markers or health factors? Yeah. That's a very, good question. And, you know, yes, you can if you browse through social media, then you can get the impression that everything is bad for you and, there's all these things that are harming your health. But, you know, the truth is, yes, there are obviously millions of things in the world that could harm our health. But that there's also, you know, the effect of how big of an effect does it have on our health. So let's say, you know, compared to diabetes, drinking from a plastic bottle is, not that big of a concern on your health in the grand scheme of things. Yes. You shouldn't want to drink plastic bottled water all the time, but having diabetes is immensely more harmful to your health. And, if you were to look at, the, you know, association with, future mortality, then diabetes will have, you know, insanely higher amounts of, increased risk of mortality and increased risk of heart disease compared to drinking from a plastic bottle, especially infrequently. So, you know, there's no specific study looking at the plastic bottle and mortality risk, but, you get the point that if you were to actually look at scientifically how much of an effect something would have on your long term health risks than things like diabetes, smoking, obesity, having kidney disease, those, excess alcohol consumption, those things are significantly worse for your health than, you know, eating eating, ramen noodles or eating instant noodles or something like that. So I should probably make, like, a longer form video and actually look at more studies specific studies on this and, try to grade different factors, and different, things that could harm your health and see, okay, what is actually harmful for you? What is significantly harmful for you? And what is kind of just, you know, like a wellness trend in terms of, improving your health and how much does it actually harm, your health? But I can, off the top of my head, say that, you know, smoking is associated with up to thirteen thousand percent increased risk of lung cancer. So if you smoke, then, that's an insane higher risk of, lung cancer compared to, you know, let's say, breathing polluted air. So if you live in a city there with slightly more polluted, yes, it's not the most optimal for your health. But compared to smoking, you know, it's still very small increased risk of lung cancer or just other kind of, health problems. Smoking is insanely more harmful for your health. Yes. You should try to breathe as clean air as possible. You know, it's obviously not always, likely that you'll be able to do that, but, we need to be realistic and we also need to be aware of how big of an effect something really is on your health. But I can give you a list of some of the top factors that I think can move the needle the most for your health and, what should be, like, a priority that, you focus on. So number one, I think, you know, yeah, obviously, don't smoke, don't drink insane amounts of alcohol, don't sleep your private self, don't, experience these, circadian mismatches frequently, don't be overweight, don't be obese. Those, everyone knows already. But, like more more detailed, more nuanced factors, I would say, having the high VO2 max is, based on the studies, one of the biggest predictors of survival, especially later in life. People with a higher VO2 max have significantly lower risk of mortality and lower risk of heart disease, lower risk of other diseases as well compared to people with a low VO2 max. And, of course, you can get caught up in the minutiae of, okay, is it actually training the VO2max that's good for you, or is it associated with just overall healthy lifestyle? Or, you know, you can get caught up in that kind of discussion. But, based on the data, just having a high ER to max, regardless of how you achieve it, will, will it is associated with a lower mortality and the differences are quite large. For example, people with a low ER to max, somewhere around, twenty milliliters per kilogram per minute, which is quite bad. Peep and if you compare to people with a fifty milliliter kilogram per minute to v r two max, that's up to, fourfold difference in mortality risk, which is a huge amount. It's much bigger than anything related to diet and, it rivals smoking. It's, not as bad as smoking, but it's pretty, pretty high up there, if you look at it that way. So I would say everyone should have the goal of trying to keep their VO two max over 50 milliliters per kilogram per minute. Maybe if it's slightly higher, then that could be better, but, 50 should be kind of the benchmark or the minimal threshold you wanna aim for. Second, I would say, visceral fat. So, yes, obesity, excess body fat in general is harmful. It's more harmful for men than it is for women. But for both men and women, visceral fat is harmful. So, it doesn't matter if your visceral fat is excessively high. It doesn't matter if you're following a healthy diet or you're just healthy overall. If you have excessive amounts of visceral fat, then, it is still on the subterranean level harming your health. So the fat around the organs, it's, what damages the organ functions the most. It what spreads the most inflammation compared to other types of fat. So, we do wanna keep our visceral fat also quite low. And then having a low visceral fat is characteristic of good health. People with, healthier lifestyles tend to have lower visceral fat. And, what is a good amount? So in a general population, middle aged people, younger people, the normal visceral fat tends to be somewhere in the range of, 400 to 500, 600 grams. So 400 to 600 range is, the general population, and, it increases with age. So it's expected to increase the older you get. And I think as a general health goal, you wanna keep your bisulf at at least below 300 grams and, more optimally below, 250 grams. So, I don't think you need to go as little as 50 grams like I had, a year ago. Right now, it's like a 100 grams, so it's probably like a still a healthy sweet spot somewhere between 50 to a 150 grams maybe. So I don't think you need to deliberately get to, you know, 150 grams of visceral fat, but, you should at least get it to below 300 and more optimally below 250 grams. How can you measure the visceral fat? Well, an easy way to do it is with a DEXA scan, but, MRI is, slightly more accurate, but the DEXA scan is good enough. Next up, I would say having a higher omega three index because, there's a lot of evidence from several, studies showing that, high omega three index is associated with lower dementia, lower heart disease, lower mortality, lower Alzheimer's, and it's very consistent phenomenon. Now, yes, you can have a high omega-three index not only because of taking an omega-three supplement, can also be some other healthy lifestyle factors, but if you look at regions with the highest omega three index, then, these regions just consume a lot of seafood and, fish, for example, Japan. They have one of the highest omega three index in the world. They have it, eight to twelve percent, and only ten percent of the Japanese population is eating less than the recommended daily allowance for omega threes. So only ten percent of Japanese people consume less than five hundred milligrams of omega threes per day. Whereas in America and most of Europe, it's it's, ninety percent of people aren't consuming enough omega threes. So you can see a clear reason why Americans have an omega three index of 4% and Japanese have an omega three index of eight to 12%. The Japanese just eat insanely more. The Japanese people just eat a lot more omega threes than seafood, which is why their omega three index is also higher. And based on the evidence out there, I think it's, a very impactful effect on, your risk of future heart disease and, Alzheimer's and dementia because the evidence is very consistent that, a high omega three index is associated with a lower risk of these, future diseases. And how do you increase your omega three index? You know, first of all, you can take a blood test to measure it. But how do you increase it? Just eating more seafood and omega threes can be also algae, can be some plant plant foods like walnuts, chia seeds. They can contain omega threes. Although some, individuals, genetically aren't able to convert it into, the, DHA. So, therefore, you need to be aware of, your best thing to do is to measure and see whether or not chia seeds or walnuts can increase your omega three index. But, most people for most people, it's gonna be easiest to consume, you know, just seafood, sea vegetables, plus, fish, and, possibly supplement, like, omega three, supplement. The next thing is, low inflammation. So, having low CRP levels is, also associated with reduced mortality, reduced Alzheimer's, reduced diabetes, reduced kidney disease, reduced heart disease. So inflammation is at the crux of, pretty much all chronic diseases and, low CRP levels typically reflect lower inflammation stats. Now CRP isn't the only inflammatory marker. You've got a lot of other inflammatory markers as well, but CRP is the most common one. It's the cheapest one to test, and it can have the best, like, systematic overview of your inflammation status. It can be the most, universal. Because if you have slightly more visceral fat, you have slightly worse diet, you sleep worse or you have just a overall unhealthier lifestyle, then your CRP levels typically tend to be, above, even not like above the normal range, but, higher than what would be optimal. Because CRP, even within the normal reference range, lower is better. So, the normal reference range actually doesn't provide you with the lowest mortality risk and the lowest risk of these chronic diseases. With CRP, as low as possible is the most optimal, reference range. So, CRP less than zero point two milligrams per liter is the sweet spot for the best health outcomes and, you know, as close to zero as possible. The thing with CRP is that if you go to the labs then the laboratory has different cutoff points for CRP. Some labs just measure only to 0.5, some do it to only one, Others do 0.2 or 0.1 so they can go, more granular or, more specific with the measurement. So, yeah, if if the lab just cuts off at 0.5, it doesn't mean that you have higher than optimal CRP. It just means that, the lab might be, you know, cutting it short before going into the more, specifics. But, yeah, if you if you can get a very specific, result, so 0.2 below that would be the sweet spot and, you know, 0.1 would be the best. Once I measured a very specific, result, it was 0.01. So I think you can't even get a close closer than that. Another thing is muscle strength. So people know that muscle strength is associated with longevity. People who are healthier tend to have slightly more muscle and, better muscle strength compared to the general population. Of course, you can take it too far. If you're a power power, power lifter or bodybuilder taking steroids, you're insanely strong, but, you're generally gonna short shorten your life as well because of the, anabolic steroids. So, you know, within the normal, I guess, possibility of human physiology without using any anabolic steroids, the higher muscle strength tends to be, better for, overall health. Now the reason why the strength matters is because, first of all, if you have muscle strength then you're exercising regularly. And if you exercise regularly, you're getting the benefits from exercise. If you exercise regularly, you're activating these different pathways that, lower inflammation, improve your metabolic health, lower visceral fat, they, lower your blood pressure, they activate these antiaging pathways in the body that are linked to lifespan extension in animals, etcetera, like AMPK, autophagy, sirtuins, etcetera. So, you know, there's a wide reason why exercise and resistance training is good for you. And, you exercise regularly, you're activating these pathways, which is why it's gonna be good for you. And second of all, the, muscle strength is gonna be protective against falls in the future. If you're an elderly person, you're more likely to fall because your balance worsens with age, your stability worsens with age, your mobility worsens with age. So you're more likely to fall off the stairs. You're more likely to trip on something. You're more likely to trip on the ice. And, with my higher muscle strength, you're less likely to fall, first of all. And if you are likely to fall, you're less likely to get a hip fracture because of increased muscle density and increased bone density. So, yeah, just having more muscle and more strength is good for you. Now how much is too much? You know, it's hard to say. There's no specific study actually looking at looking at that. I would say, you know, I I like to, base it on, like, how much muscle and strength is good. I would I like to base it on, you know, BMI. So BMI is not a very good estimation of your, you know, body fat percentage. You can be very lean and be overweight with a BMI because you have more muscle. But, you know, BMI can on the extremes, they're still accurate. So if you have a BMI of 30, then, and you, you know, you have muscle as well. But in this situation with the BMI of 30, you probably have too much fat as well. If you have a BMI of, let's say, twenty six, twenty seven, you're lean with muscle, then, you know, that's reasonable. You, you're not carrying extra body fat. You just have a little bit more muscle. But to reach BMI thirty, then, first of all, you would need to be taking anabolic steroids to have such insane amounts of muscle to have a BMI thirty with low body fat. Or the second scenario is that, okay, yes, you have some muscle tissue, but you're also carrying a little bit too much body fat. So being this kind of a chunky strongman or a chunky power lifter. Does that make sense? So, you know, you wouldn't want to have very high BMI even if it's muscle because excess weight overall I like to say that bodybuilders are, like, obese people with, with cardiomegal. So they have enlarged heart because of their muscle tissue and, increased muscle mass but they're also just, obese in terms of their BMI. Yes, they are lower body weight or lower body fat, but their body weight is dis disproportionately higher. And, the increased weight, the increased muscle tissue is wearing down their organs over the course of decades. So even if you're sub 10% body fat, having too much muscle tissue that will put your BMI at, like, 30, I think it's harmful. So if you have muscle tissue, then try to keep your BMI still on, like, 27 with low body fat. That will be, like, the, kind of the higher limit, in my opinion, to assess whether or not you're having too much too much muscle mass for your height and your BMI, if that makes sense. So my BMI right now is, twenty five point five. I'm pretty lean. I'm maybe around 10% body fat usually. So, my BMI, twenty five point five. I have decent amount of muscle, but I'm not trying to pack on more. I'm trying to keep it around this. So, yeah, that's that's what I'm focusing on. And the last important factor is probably having good mental health. I think it's very underrated. So, you know, it's it's debatable whether or not having good mental health has a causal role in making you live longer on and having longevity benefits and improving your health. You know, partly, it probably has because you'll have lower stress hormones, you'll have higher happiness hormones. So these neurochemicals do have, like, a direct impact on your physiology. But I think it's also just that if you are healthier and happier, then you will make healthier decisions. You're more motivated to do the healthy things, and, you'll just enjoy it as well. So if you hate being healthy or you have just bad mental health for whatever reason, then, you're just less likely to actually do the things that, keep you healthy. Does that make sense? So, yeah, having good mental health is important. And what is one of the biggest source of mental health is usually relationships for most people, social isolation, loneliness. Those things are associated with depression, anxiety, and, poor mental health. Just having a good social relationships, quality relationships, it doesn't have to be, like, a large amount of relationship. You don't need to have hundreds of friends. But, feeling isolated and feeling, feeling, that your, like, social, needs aren't being met, that's the core of loneliness and social isolation. So it's it's more about whether or not you feel you have access to support, social support if you want to. So you don't need to get it, but if you feel that you can't have, any support from anyone, then that's, in research, that is what's characterized as being socially isolated and, feeling more lonely. It's not about how much you socialize or how much you interact with people. It's more about how much support you feel you have. And this is very, subjective, this how much feel the support. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about the red light hat by Bone Charge, which, a lot of people have been waiting for a long time. Basically, you're getting some red light therapy on your scalp. It's a regular cap, and, it just gives you the specific wavelengths of red light that, will help with the hair growth and the collagen synthesis in the scalp. One charge also has a lot of different types of red light therapy devices like the face mask, which actually has specific studies on where they use split face experiments and they show that the LED red light face masks do improve skin wrinkles and coalescence indices in the skin. But, yeah, OneCharge has a ton of different rehab therapy devices as well that have come out with over the course of years. So this red light hat is the newest one. It's it's pretty good. I kind of wear it in the mornings just to, help with, hair growth a little bit. And they obviously also have, regular red light panels. The big ones that you're gonna sit in front of and also get benefits on your skin as well as overall energy. Check out the Boncharge red light therapy devices and their new red light hat at boncharge.com/simland for 15% discount. Next question. What is your take on glycine? I saw that Physionic made a few videos showing that it can increase cancer. I did check out the Physionik's video and, the video didn't say that glycine increases cancer and the study he referenced also didn't, claim that it showed that, glycine and serine restriction was helpful for colon cancer patients. So the interesting thing about glycine is that, cancers can use it for their own survival. It's not that, glycine is promoting cancer. It's, that the cancer is utilizing glycine for its own growth. And, you know, the same was a few months ago or last year was with taurine as well. They saw that taurine or that the taurine increased cancer. Well, that wasn't the case. It more was more so that, the cancer used taurine, to survive. So the issue with these kind of studies is that people get caught up with, the association with the glycine and the cancer, but that they fail to realize that, you know, the relationship between them isn't that the glycine was increasing or causing the cancer. It was more so the cancer were just stealing, resources from the body and using glycine as one of them to survive. And the cancers are just so, you know, incredibly clever and they're very tricky. They can use almost any nutrient in the body for their own survival. They can use protein. They can use glucose. They can use ketones. They can use, the process of autophagy, which is the cellular clearance protein, clearance process to also scavenge the the material for their own survival. They can use the process of angiogenesis, which is the growth of, blood vessels for survival. So, you know, growing blood vessels, I think it's an important thing for survival for your own body. You need angiogenesis to a certain extent. But the cancers can use the angiogenesis process for their own survival. They can use autophagy, which is seen to extend lifespan in animals and it's important to, you know, clear out cellular debris. You can use autophagy for its own survival. Glycine is, you know, generally beneficial for your body in in terms of helping with glutathione synthesis, collagen synthesis, creatine synthesis, etcetera. So but in certain situations, it can be harmful. The same with taurine. Taurine has been seen to have benefits in humans for lipids, blood pressure, exercise performance, etcetera. But in certain situations, the cancer can use it. So, no, it doesn't mean that glycine is causing cancer. It's more so that the cancer is just so tricky and it adapts always. It's always adapting to the environment, which is your body and, it tries to survive. So the lesson here is that, okay, maybe if you have, cancer or you're at an increased risk of cancer, don't take glycine, but, it doesn't mean that you should stop taking glycine if you don't have cancer. So, yeah, it's more or less than in the adaptability of cancers itself in of itself. The cancers are just very, clever and tricky, and it's hard to overcome them, obviously. So, you know, you can find dozens of different healthy nutrients out there that in some way can promote cancer growth, but they're not necessarily implicated in causing cancer. Next question, is there any evidence that supplements can affect brain health like creatine omega threes, impact cognitive functions such as IQ scores? There is a bigger difference between just short term cognitive function like attention, short term memory, and focus, and those things versus IQ. IQ is more like a standardized test and, it's not, it is more resistant to short term changes. So if you, you know, let's say, take a supplement that increases your short term, cognition, you know, there's a there are some supplements out there that do that. You know, let's say creatine can short term, especially after sleep deprivation and after stress, to improve your cognition, it's not going to actually increase your IQ in the short term. So, the long term increase in IQ is more a matter of, you know, education. You can, yes, in small amounts, move the IQ. There is some, you know, evidence that longer education, just learning new things, increases IQ, slightly. There is some effect on your nutrition as well. If you are severely deficient in certain nutrients, let's say, especially during developmental years, it's more important in the early period of life. Like, iodine deficiency can cause, mental, developmental issues as well as a cognitive issues. So, especially during pregnancy and, early in life, making sure that the child gets enough iodine. Omega threes also have that, bull iron creating probably as well to a certain extent, but, creating, yeah, is, more, like, acute short term, cognitive enhancer. And it mostly applies if you're, in, deficient deficiency of, if you've been under some sleep stress or just sleep deprivation. B vitamins are important in the developmental years. And if you are deficient in certain micronutrients, then that can, it just, hinders your IQ or hinders your, cognitive function. If you start supplementing b vitamins and, let's say, omega threes or you just eat more of these foods that contain iron and etcetera, you're not going to, essentially increase your IQ. You can only bring it back to your normal baseline, if that makes sense. So, if as an adult, you're deficient in creatine or b vitamins or or, iron or some, iodine or make threes, etcetera, you can experience some aspects of, mental health issues or there's some evidence that depression, like if you have low b vitamins that can give symptoms of depression and, you know, it can give symptoms of cognitive deficits, but it's not really going to enhance your IQ above what's your baseline, if that makes sense, these supplements. For actually increasing IQ, then, the most impactful thing is education and the evidence for some, like, brain games and, problem solving these kind of, mental games. It's, much weaker. So the biggest thing is education and, you know, actually learning new skills and, learning new things. Can you update us about your current thinking on how to best to exploit autophagy for health span? What are the best routines to incorporate throughout the years to optimize autophagy? Yes. So, I was one of the OGs of autophagy, YouTubing back in the day, like, 2018, 2019. I I established myself quite well with creating content on autophagy. I wrote a book on it, metabolic autophagy. And, obviously, I'm not like some PhD in autophagy, but, you know, I was thinking about it a lot. I was researching a lot, to distill, you know, to this day, it's a very important thing. And, in 2021, dysfunctional autophagy was categorized as a new hallmark of aging. So you could say I was ahead of the curve in in that sense. But, what what I think about autophagy right now, what are the things to optimize it for overall health? I think it's still an incredibly vital process to health and longevity. The most important thing is to just, I think the most impactful period of autophagy optimization is in your deep sleep, in conjunction with melatonin. So what you wanna do is pretty much have the sleeping hours be optimized for recovery and, cellular clearance, cellular cleaning. So melatonin, it's a powerful antioxidant. It conducts bone growth but conducts, physical repair, memory retention. Brain detoxification from various compounds via the glymphatic system helps to squeeze out even microplastics from the brain via the glymphatic system. So melatonin is absolute king of physical repair and mental repair in your sleep. And autophagy is also one of those processes that gets coordinated with melatonin in your sleep. So, sleeping in pitch black darkness, having absolutely zero artificial lights in your bedroom that would reach your eyes or, reach your brain in some other ways. So the best way to do is use, like, a sleep mask. You know, if you have some blinking smoking detector or something, then yes, you could put like a duct tape over it, but you could also wear a sleep mask. I think, it's safer to just still eliminate all possible light sources like on on, like, the power cord, like, oh, some sort of a smartphone light, TV light, you know, there's red dots on the TV. If your laptop is charging in the other side of the room, there's the lighting the charging light is on. You know, those small things, you might think that they don't matter, but they matter quite a lot. So exposure to artificial light in your sleep is associated with, a whole host of health problems, so you should sleep in as dark room of as possible. And, you know, on top of that, wear a sleep mask as well to be absolutely sure. So that's the most important thing I think for autophagy clearance. Maybe that has changed, over the last, you know, when I was researching, pathology before. I think the I think I've prioritized a lot more the deep sleep recovery with melatonin. And I think that's a lot more important because your body, yes, you know, it conducts a lot of different repair processes during the daytime as well. It, you know, it it has, like, anti inflammatory processes during the daytime if you consume certain foods, etcetera. But, you know, the peak of repair, peak of antiaging occurs in your sleep, in your deep sleep with melatonin. Exercise is important still, and cardiovascular exercise, I think, is more potent for ophthalmology regulation than resistance training, although both exercises will do that. So doing some form of low intensity aerobic exercise as well as some high intensity interval training. High intensity interval training will increase the lethality faster than low intensity exercise. So if you do some sprints, you're expected to get lethality much faster than you're walking or cycling at low intensity for that matter. Other things like eating or fasting is obviously very important. Calorie restriction is important. You know, I still confine my eating window in certain, timeframe. I nowadays, I have probably like six hour eating window. So for from the first meal that I have to the last meal. So that's pretty similar that was in the past. I don't think you need to squeeze all your food into one hour or one meal a day. There's no evidence that it's better. And with extended fasting as well, you know, it, arguably will upregulate autofascia, but, you will also do that with things like exercise, things like having very deep sleep, supplementing melatonin potentially, just being in a calorie deficit, doing the sauna, those all these things increase the autophagy. So there's, you know, no evidence that you need to do some extended fasting to gain benefits of autophagy. And, extended fasting might have some negative side effects as well in your health. You might lose muscle. You might have some lower thyroid, etcetera. So it's not always, better, if that makes sense. And, yeah, I think my, you know, daily esophageal routine just involves some time restricted eating. I make sure that I stop eating earlier so I could have more melatonin produced by the gut, before bed. So, the gut produces a lot of melatonin. And, for that, it's better to be fasted, at least have, like, an emptier stomach rather than a full stomach and, I get very good deep sleep. I exercise during the daytime. I get some sunlight that regulates melatonin production as well as autophagy, and, do the sauna quite regularly as well. Yet there's certain nutrients or certain compounds like green tea, increases autophagy. Coffee, polyphenols, increase autophagy. Various, polyphenols in, fruits, vegetables, and olive oil, increase autophagy. So, yeah, I eat those foods regularly. Next question. What's your thought about total plasma exchange, young plasma exchange? Yeah. So this is the new antiaging treatment that's becoming popular right now. It's also very expensive. I think it's up to $10,000 in The US. And there was a recent study that showed the biological age score decreased after doing the total plasma exchange. But, you know, this doesn't mean almost anything because, you can see those same effects probably if you were to do some calorie restriction for a few days or a few weeks and, and, you know, following a healthy lifestyle as well. So just, you know, take exchanging the plasma, yes, you're just taking out the, I guess, like, junk material in the plasma. So, yes, the plasma looks younger, but it doesn't really translate over to overall lower biological age. At least there's no evidence that it does so right now. So it's, yeah, hard to say if this short term changes in, clearing the plasma or exchanging it whether or not it actually translates into long term health improvements. Now the plasma exchange and certain of these apheresis, procedures that filter the blood or filter the plasma, they are being used for certain medical conditions. So they're used for certain autoimmune conditions, and, they clearly work in some aspects of, like, lowering certain, antibodies or lowering inflammation. So maybe it will have long term effects as well. But then the question is how frequently would you need to do it? Right now, these, I guess, health enthusiasts and influencers or biomarkers, they're doing it maybe once a year, twice a year, or something like that. But is it enough? Because, yeah, you might do the total plasma exchange. You might do some other apheresis types of procedures. But, how long will it last? Is it going to last only one, two days, or is it going to last few weeks, few months? I don't necessarily don't have the answer to that. So the question is, yeah, how frequently should you do it, or what is the optimal frequency to do it? Is it something that you would need to do, like, every few months? You You know, then then the problem is that it's super expensive. So, yeah, those are my thoughts about it. I think it's very interesting that it probably has some biological effect, but, you know, it doesn't replace the other healthy lot fundamentals. I think it's more relevant in people with certain medical conditions, certain autoimmune conditions, certain inflammatory conditions as a short term therapeutic to, improve their condition. But, an otherwise healthy person might need less of that net yeah. Some people use it just to, you know, filter out microplastics or that's their goal. But, you can also filter out microplastics with cheaper apheresis methods, just the regular apheresis, EBO, extra corporeal blood, ozogenation and oxygenation. That's one form of this. It's not the same as the total plasma exchange, but, that one also theoretically helps with microplastics, and it's a lot cheaper. So, yes, you know, I wouldn't say that most people probably need to do it. It's kind of a luxury therapy in that sense that it might make feel it might make people feel good about it, that they feel that they're cleaning their blood and cleaning their plasma, but the actual value for that is maybe a bit more limited or it's significantly lower than the value of, you know, maybe even doing, like, a fasting mimicking diet or something else like that that is a lot cheaper and provides similar not similar, but, you know, provides different types of health benefits in the short term, if that makes sense. Next question. Do you use injectable NAD or glulophan? No. I definitely don't use injectable NAD or gluethan. I haven't used it, my myself. And, to be honest, I'm not really interested in using injectable NAD. First of all, I'm young. I don't have NAD problems. I have high energy on a daily basis, and I and if I wanted to increase my energy levels, I would use some cheaper energy supplements like, niacinamide, may even NMN or Naur, but niacinamide already does the trick. And, you know, earlier I said that things can oftentimes promote survival of cancer. Well, the same applies to NAD. The cancer can there is evidence that cancers can use NAD as well for their own survival. So, I'm not saying that injectable NAD or NAD supplements would increase the risk of cancer, but it's just something that, you know, the risk reward ratio is not, there for me. So I'm not interested in NAD IV or NAD injections for because I don't need it, and, there's no no, potential benefit to it either. And I think it's important to realize that NAD isn't a molecule that the more the better, that you need to increase your NAD the same way you wanna increase your VO2max or or muscle strength or something like that. That. Yes. You know, VO2 max also probably has a point of diminishing returns because you to have a super high VO2 max, you need to be training a lot. But, with NAD, you can bypass the effort. You most people will not have a very high VO2 max because it takes a lot of effort, but NAD injections supplements that you can gain get intravenously in large quantities like gluathione, larger amounts of vitamin C or NAD, they can have oftentimes more harmful effects if taken in, large doses and there's no, like, necessity for it. I'm not saying that this is the case with NAD, but I'm just saying that the idea that you need to have more NAD is not true, oftentimes. You know, whether or not you need actually NAD depends if you have low NAD or if you're under some sort of fatigue or under some sort of, physiological stress like, jet lag or sleep deprivation or just chronic stress. So in those situations, yes, you might benefit from short term boost, for lack of a better word, from NAD. But, it's another linear relationship that the higher the NAD, the better. And the more NAD you take, the better it is. Next question, what can we do if time restricted eating and calorie restriction increases cortisol too much? I was already lean, and for a year, it was great. But now my morning cortisol is always high, and I wake up a lot during sleep. Anything, that you can do in excess can be harmful. So too much exercise can raise cortisol, too much, or, you know, I think it's important that one of the benefits of exercise come from the increased cortisol, at least in the short term. So the cortisol is often depicted as a bad guy, but cortisol has essential roles as a body. You need cortisol in the morning. Cortisol helps to kick start your circadian rhythm and gives you energy and alertness. If you feel tired in the morning, then that can often be that your body isn't producing enough cortisol. Cortisol helps with fat oxidation, and the cortisol mediates some of the benefits you get from exercise as well. People who produce more cortisol if if the exercise yields a higher cortisol response, then, you might you you at least in some studies, you get more benefits. But, yeah, the problem is that if the cortisol is chronically elevated or it's elevated at the wrong time. So if the cortisol is elevated before bed, then you'll have a harder time falling asleep. You'll wake up more often, etcetera. If cortisol is elevated throughout the day, you'll just be crunchy stressed out, anxious, and, worn out. So, the issue is how much cortisol. Now if for you, you've identified that time restricted eating and calorie restriction is keeping your body in a heightened state of stress and higher cortisol levels, then maybe take a break. Right? So if you said you're already lean, then, maybe you're getting too lean. So, then just eat more food. If that doesn't fix it, then, change the eating window. So the first important thing is the food intake that can move the needle the most. If you're lean, then stop doing calorie restriction, eat a little bit more food, and see if that fix it. Then you move on with the timing of when you eat. If the food quantity didn't fix it, then maybe you're fasting too long. Your body is currently in a spot where it can't handle going for longer periods of time without eating. So then just introduce a snack, extend your eating window, have breakfast on some some days of the week, etcetera. Then, then you can tinker with the macros. So usually, carbohydrates are more anti cortisol. Carbohydrates lower cortisol. And, you know, simple sugars tend to do that quite easily because carbohydrates, they raise insulin, they signal your body that there's food abundance. So calorie restriction is harmful for your body because it detects. So excess calorie restriction, you know, leads to starvation and that the signal there is low insulin, low IGF one, low protein synthesis, so your body thinks that it's, starving if you're in chronic calorie restriction. So it the cortisol comes from the low insulin and low IGF-one signaling in this scenario if your body hasn't switched into ketosis. But introducing the carbohydrates can, raise insulin and it can tell your body that it's not experiencing famine and it's not experiencing starvation. So just increasing the carbohydrate intake can help with that. Carbohydrates for dinner can oftentimes improve your sleep, so they raise serotonin, which then gets converted to melatonin, and, they also allow tryptophan to get into the brain. So if there's a lot of amino acids in your bloodstream, then the tryptophan can't enter the brain. So, with, elevation and insulin, like a small insulin elevation, the carbohydrates or the insulin helps to clear the bloodstream from the other amino acids and tryptophan gets to the brain, which then gets converted to serotonin and then melatonin. And, carbohydrates can also make you more sleepy and drowsy, so you'll sleep better. So having just a high carb meal for dinner can oftentimes just make you very relaxed and docile in a good way. It lowers your cortisol, makes you fall asleep more. But then, you know, there's other things as well in your life that, can increase the cortisol. Things like just work stress, too much exercise, too much sauna, or too much cold, whatever the case is. So there's obviously a lot of things that can raise your cortisol, not just time restricted eating or calorie restriction. But I think the the order of things, how would I approach it, you can try to replicate. So the first, increase your calories. If that doesn't work, change your eating window, introduce carbohydrates, etcetera. And the final question of the podcast is, what's your opinion on mini trampolines? Seems like exercising on them come with a lot of benefits, but not a lot of people talk about them. What are your thoughts? Yes, there is evidence that, mini trampolines can improve bone density. They can also improve ER2max. Now I would I would expect that the the benefits on bone density and ER2max are more significant in people with low baseline ER2max and low bone density. So if you're already, you know, in top 5% of ER2max and bone density for your age, then you're probably gonna get less benefits from from the mini trampolines. But if your, you know, your bone density is below the standard deviation, below the norm, then, then you probably will see some benefits on bone density, for example. And if you have low VO2 max, just the small aerobic exercise can also increase your VO2 max. I like to do the mini trampoline because of the lymphatic drainage. So if you're jumping your stimulating lymph flow, you're helping with, you know, the soleus push up as well, pumping the blood up. So, I think everyone should do some form of rebounding on a daily basis. Now it doesn't have to be a trampoline. You can also just, you know, you can bounce up and down in your room as well, or outside, but to get, you know, the lymph flow going. So, yes, regular walking can support lymph flow, but it, is probably less effective than actually rebounding or just slightly jumping up and down. So, yeah, I think some small mini trampoline in the backyard can be, quite a good idea. I think I think that would at least I would have it in, like, in a perfect home. Alright. Thanks for watching this video. If you wanna know how I rank a 100 hill habits from worst to best, then check out this video next.