So it's the 2026, and in this video I'm gonna do something I've never done before. I'm going to walk you through my full longevity protocol for this year. I'm gonna share my results from last year, 2025, and I'm gonna share with you what are my goals for this year, how can I improve some of my biomarkers and health metrics, and I'm gonna walk you through how do I think about these things, how do I structure my own protocols, what kind of biomarkers I measure, what kind of biomarkers I think are more important than others, And I think that's why you will also just learn a lot from this video? Not only will you learn about what I do, you will also learn about how can you structure your own health and longevity protocol based on this information here. So let's begin with my 2025 results. I got, a list of some of these highlight results. I'm not gonna go through all these hundreds of biomarkers that I measured, 2025, but I'm gonna just list some of the more relevant and more interesting ones such as my age. So I had my 30 birthday in September 2025, and, yeah, I'm now officially in my thirties, which, means that I'm at kind of the peak of my physical performance. So, for males in your early thirties, that's where your strength and muscle mass at least peak. Your bone density peaks. Your VO2 max naturally has already declined compared to someone in their twenties, that's when your VO2 max naturally peaks. But, in other aspects of physical fitness, that's where your peak is in your early thirties. So, I am supposed to be in my physical peak in terms of fitness. And it does reflect as well in my, certain fitness markers like VO2 max. So, my VO2 max is in the range of 60 to 66, which, would definitely put me in the top 1% of, the general population even greater than that. If you were to just look at the general population, then, that would even be, like, 0.5%, 0.1% depending on the group. Obviously, it's not still, like, elite athlete level. Elite athletes might have a VO2 max of seventies, but 60 to 66 is still, very good. Pull ups. So I think the pull ups is one of the best measurements or tests for upper body strength because, it also considers your body weight. So if you are very heavy, even if it's pure muscle, your ability to do pull ups will be slightly lower. So pull ups is a good litmus test for gauging your upper body strength plus your body weight, making sure that you're just not too heavy. So, body weight, muscle mass, etcetera, they all have this u shaped curve. If you're too skinny, too frail, too low body weight, then that's harmful. You can increase your risk of future hip pressures and failure. If your overweight, even if it's muscle, then that is harmful. It's gonna wear down your organs. So having very high muscle strength such as being able to do pull ups, I think is a very good indicator that, you know, your body composition is in check, you don't have too much body fat, you're not insanely heavy, and you're also relatively strong by doing a lot of, your own bodyweight exercise. Visceral fat it's is obviously this internal fat around the organs and liver inside the muscles but it is, mostly an indicator of your metabolic health and it is a risk factor for heart disease as well. So my visceral fat ranges in the in the 54 to a 150 grams which is, very low and it would definitely be in the top one percent of, the population in terms of, how low it is. CRP as well, you know, CRP is a marker that different labs, they cut off at different points. Some labs cut it off at 0.5 or at 0.2 or 0.1. I've had a very sensitive, result with CRP with the lab cutting off, and, yeah, it has counted it at 0.01, which is extremely low, close to zero, pretty much as close to zero as you can get. And that will also put me in the top one percent, again, even greater than that. So CRP is a marker of systemic inflammation and I think that it is a good indicator of overall health because, inflammation is at the root of pretty much all chronic diseases. And what we do know is that, inflammation definitely drives aging as well. ApoB, so, this reflects particle count of lipoproteins specifically and, it's mostly a risk factor for heart disease. So mine, fifty eight milligrams per deciliter is also a very good result, would put me in the top 1%. Triglycerides, so, these are also a good indicator of metabolic health, mostly your insulin sensitivity. If you have good metabolic health, then your triglycerides would be lower. It means that your body is utilizing the fat for fuel, and it's not accumulating in the bloodstream. So high amounts of triglycerides in the blood will lead to insulin resistance and metabolic syndrome, and it also drives the visceral fat gain. So my very low triglyceride levels, would also explain some of the reasons I have very low visceral fat. And I have such low triglycerides despite eating, such a higher carb intake, which is often thought to be not possible, but, clearly shown that it is possible. So it's a matter of more energy balance and insulin sensitivity rather than how many carbohydrates are you eating. So phenol age is one of these experimental, biological age. Clocks. It's calculated from certain, blood markers such as albumin, CRP, glucose, and others, 10 of them in total. And, this calculation would put my biological age at 12 to 16, somewhere in that range. Obviously, it's not stagnant. It fluctuates every day, every every week based on the blood markers, but in that range from the tests that I've done in 2025. Now, obviously, it's not mean that I actually have a biology of a 12 year old or a 16 year old, but it just means that my blood markers are in, good spot. So here's a snapshot of a more comprehensive blood marker panel I did in May 2025 and, the majority of the kind of more vital groups of biomarkers came back in, green. And I'm gonna talk about the blood marker results later in this video. Now let's move on with the different categories of biomarkers and health that are relevant. Body composition, so muscle mass, fat mass in, 2025. This was the beginning of the year January. This was somewhere in the middle and I deliberately bulked a little bit. I tried to gain muscle just as a good support exercise. So I went from around seventy nine kilograms to eighty three kilograms. Now this was more muscle memory because, even earlier than that, like, twenty twenty, twenty twenty one during the lockdown period, I actually was around eighty six kilograms. So as, you know, nothing else to do at home, than to bulk and to try to build more muscle. So I was at 86 with not as lean as this, but, still relatively lean. So this is just muscle memory that my body's regaining some of that old muscle that I had before, which is a very easy way to build muscle back if you ever stop training for a little bit and then you stop start to do it again. But, nowadays, I kind of sell it around 80, so I did a positive body recomposition change. I lost some body fat. I gained a little bit of muscle mass mostly through muscle memory. So I gained 80 at eighty three kilograms, I lost some of the body fat, and now I'm around, yeah, eighty eighty one kilograms. So let's talk about my goals. What are my goals now for body composition? So my visceral fat, as I said, is around fifty four to 150 grams. My goal is to just maintain it. So visceral fat is obviously you still need in some amounts. There's a healthy amount of visceral fat that you need to, you know, shield the organs to protect. It's like 0% body fat isn't good. You, you won't live without any body fat. The same applies to visceral fat. You're never gonna have zero fat into zero visceral fat or at least it's not gonna be healthy. So 54 is extremely low. I think it might be too low for optimal health. So 150 grams is decent. 150 grams I had during the midday or mid bulk when I was eighty three kilograms, which is still very impressive because if you work at bulk, you usually will see an increase in visceral fat. When I was this eighty six kilograms, I didn't do a DEXA scan back then, but I would presume my visceral fat was probably around 400, 500, which is kind of the average for the general population. For the average general population male in their late twenties, early thirties, they would probably have four hundred, five hundred grams of visceral fat. And someone who has less than that, let's say 300, then they are already a healthier individual than the general population. As a general rule of thumb, you wanna have your visceral fat below 300 in my opinion, so somewhere in the range of 200 to 300 is, good. If it's below 200, such as a 150 grams, then that's, extremely good result. Body fat percentage, so, I'm around 10% and I intend to maintain it. I'm not going to plan to bulk. I'm not going to plan to lose body fat specifically. Maybe, you know, during some periods, I'll just lose a little bit of body fat. But, yeah, I'm just gonna maintain it. I think 10% is, very healthy spot for males. So for males, somewhere between eight to 12, I think, is the sweet spot. 10% is a good middle ground. As a male, you definitely wanna be below 15%. Below 10% is a bit harder to sustain just in terms of food intake. You need to restrict food intake a bit more. And, you know, just being too skinny can also be harmful. So 10%, 10 to 12% I think is the sweet spot for males. Over 15% is a bit you're gonna get you're starting to look a bit chubby in terms of that. For males, it's very interesting, body fat percentage and, just body composition matters a lot more for male longevity than it does for females based on the research. So, for males, anything above fifteen percent is associated with increased mortality and, below fifteen percent is better. For females, it doesn't matter that much. So first of all, women have generally higher body fat to begin with, but anything between 20 to 30% doesn't really appear to matter for mortality risk. So it's a kind of a flat flat line. If it's below that, then that can indicate higher risk due to, frailty mostly and low bone density. But if it's too high over thirty to thirty five percent, then that's just, in the obesity category, which makes sense. So twenty to thirty for women and less than fifteen for for men. I would say 10 to 12 is the most optimal for men. Muscle mass, so you can measure muscle mass as well. As I said, if your muscle mass is too high, then, that can still be more counterproductive for maximal lifespan. Short term survival, yes, higher muscle mass can be more useful, but if you're talking about maximal longevity like 110 years of age, then, obviously there's not gonna be any bodybuilders at that age. So, you do need muscle mass. The general population probably is a bit undermuscled. Having more muscle would improve your metabolic health, your visceral fat, your other health markers, but obviously you don't wanna become a stronger power lifter or a fat power lifter or a body builder, etcetera. So my goal right now is maintain. I think I have a perfect muscle mass for longevity for my goals, and I'm just gonna focus on strength and performance otherwise. So I'm not specifically trying to bulk or gain muscle. And my appendicular lean mass index which measures the amount of muscle in your, arms and legs is 10 kilograms per square meter. So you can measure it. I'm gonna share the graph showing what does it actually mean. But that will put me in the, top 5% of individuals in terms of muscle mass, this, 10 kilogram per square meter. Bone mineral density is also very important. I think an underrated aspect of longevity is bone density. And mine is 1.5 for one grams per cubic centimeters. You can also do it with a DEXA scan, and that would put me around yet top five percent of individuals. Interestingly, you know, bone density peaks in your thirties. So biologically speaking, my muscle mass and bone density would be at the peak right now at the age of 31. But because I'm not like your average general population individual, I am a lot healthier. I do a lot more things to improve my muscle and bone density, then it's reasonable that I'll be able to maintain it for at least for the next ten years maybe and possibly even increase it. There's no reason why I wouldn't be able to do that if I wanted to. I think I do think that bone mineral density is possible to increase for me a little bit, but I'm not specifically, you know, trying to do that. I'm not trying to specifically gain mass or gain muscle, which would also increase my bone density by doing that. So here are some of the screenshots from the tests as well to prove that that actually the the results are real. So, liver fat, so one point five percent, that's a extremely good result. That will also put me in maybe top one percent of individuals, top five percent individuals, somewhere between that. Normal healthy liver fat percentage is, like, two to 3% for the average person. If it's above 3%, then that's, considered to be fatty liver stage one. So, 1.5% is slightly leaner than the general population, which makes sense. And, yeah, the visceral fat, somewhere at the 54. Bone density, this is from a DXA scan. So as you can see, my bone density is, higher than the average. This middle line here is the the average, the median, and I'm above that. So I'm, yeah, somewhere around, like the top 5% in terms of bone mass for people of my age in their early thirties. So this DEXA scan specifically outlined the different parts of the my body as well, left arm, right arm, spine, pelvis, etcetera. So how much bone density do I have? And interestingly, my head has the highest bone density of all my body parts. So all the other body parts are like 1.5, 1.6, 1.2, but my my head is 2.1. So significantly higher bone density in my skull for some reason, than other body parts. And my total body bone density, so this this z score and t score, these are like standard deviations above, the norm. So I'm one point three and one point two standard deviations above the norm for my age and the people in their thirties where which is when people which is where bone density peaks biologically in the general population. A perpendicular lean mass index. So, this one reflects the muscle mass in your arms and legs. As I said, mine is 10 from the last test. So this would put me right here, not in the top 3%, but, yeah, like in the top 5%, something like that. And as you can see in the general population, muscle mass declines with age, but, the early thirties is the natural peak for, males. So I'm at the top 5% with muscle mass. If your appendicular lean mass index is, seven for males, that is considered the sarcopenia threshold, which means that you have low muscle mass and low muscle strength. So in people below this seven number have a higher risk of diabetes, high risk of hip fractures, high risk of dying overall due to the sarcopenia. So you want to keep your appendicular lean mass index above the seven threshold for as long as possible. And for women it's, 5.5. So, obviously women have lower muscle mass so their threshold is also lower which which is when they can be considered, sarcopenic. But for women the muscle mass decline is not, really, actually, it's not actually that significant compared to males. So for women, the muscle mass can be more stable. It's not declining as the same way as it does for men. I want to take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices, which are the Bond Charge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes, they do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin antiaging, hormone optimization, pain management, and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes, especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the Bond Charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most regular Therabodyzers don't have the right wavelengths of light, which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Point Charge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research, and they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code seam, s I I m, for a 15% discount. Alright. Let's talk about exercise. So exercise is a huge part of my protocol. I think a lot of my biomarker results, my other just health results are due to me focusing a lot on exercise. I think that has one of the best effects on your overall long term health and survival. So, let's start with some of the stats currently. Pull ups, 33. I did I have a video on my channel. You can check it out. 33, pull ups for my 30 birthday. I've done 33, and then I did 31 pull ups with complete dead hang pause at the bottom as well. So if someone says that it's not good form or that, I'm just doing half reps, then check out the video. I lock out every rep with the full elbows, and I actually lock out the shoulders as well, the scapula. So, yeah, thirty thirty one dead hang pull ups at the age of 31, which was a goal for me to have, and, 33 as well, which was done, in another time. So that would definitely put me in, like, a top 1% of upper body strength relative to body weight in terms of being able to do, pull ups. Back squat. So barbells, back squat, I think that is also one of the best, just resistance training exercises and a strength test because it's a very functional movement. A squat is something that, you know, you should be able to do for as long as possible, And it a squat requires you to have very good core strength, very good leg strength, very good back strength, even neck neck strength to a certain extent. So there's back squat a heavy back squat is just a full body exercise really speak if we're being honest, then it's more than just a leg exercise. And, it's such a functional exercise, and, I think that is very important. So my current, number is a hundred and seventy kilograms, which is below four hundred pounds, and I will put maybe, like, in the top 10%. Obviously, yes, there's a lot of fitness people who can lift 200 kilos with squat or even more than that. So this this number isn't yet, like, significantly impressive in the fitness community, but it obviously is a good result in the general population. So, and also also all things being considered, I'm not some, like, very heavy individual or, like, I'm lean. So when I'm talking about health and longevity, then you just shouldn't focus on one single biomarker. You shouldn't just focus on just the DO2max or just the back squat or, you know, just CRP or just albumin or just whatever biological age test. You need to look at all of these markers and find a balance or just, you know, wager all these markers and look at the holistic picture. And I also actually don't want to build massive legs because, I'm more like a calisthenics athlete. I like to do more calisthenics. And I've already had a higher back squat before when I was this eighty six kilogram individual. A few years ago, I was able to actually do like a 185 kilogram squat. So this is not my, like, all time best, but it's what I'm currently working with because of, now I'm, you know, six kilos lighter than I was before. Grip strength, so measuring it with the the nanometer, a 135 kilograms combined, so 67 kilograms, each arm, that will put me in a bit like a top 5%. Now, yeah, the grip strength is kind of a mean that working on your grip and training your grip isn't gonna make you live longer, but it's just a very easy test you can use to gauge your upper body strength. You know, pull ups are you could also use pull ups. I think pull ups can actually be a better indicator than grip strength testing because pull ups also look at your, you know, body fat percentage, your your, mobility, your just, coordination, all these other things. So pull ups arguably are a better marker than grip strength, but, you know, we can still look at the grip strength. There's just a lot more studies on grip strength and, mortality risk. VO2max, so cardiorespiratory fitness, one of the most powerful biomarkers of, survival. So, people with a higher VO2 max have significantly lower mortality, significantly lower risk of other chronic diseases. And the reason is that, people with a high VO2 max just exercise a lot. So it just highlights that people who exercise more tend to live longer and, have lower rates of these chronic diseases. Not specific that you need to have a specific number for your VO2 max. The same with grip strength. Training your grip strength isn't gonna make you live longer, but if you exercise regularly, you will have a higher grip strength, which means that healthier people have higher grip strength. The same way with the ear to max. People who exercise more, people do do more specifically cardiorespiratory fitness and cardiovascular exercise, the the the training volume that you accumulate to have a high VO2 max is what mediates these health benefits. And, yeah, that would put me in the top 1%, maybe even lower than that like top 0.1 or something in the general population if we were to exclude athletes. Athletes have a VO2 max of maybe in their seventies. Some Norwegian cross country skiers like the best of the best in the world, they'll have it in their eighties, or nineties. Resting heart rate. So, how fast my heart beats when I'm resting laying on the bed. 38. So, resting heart rate is interesting that it declines with age in extreme, like, longevity. So people who are very old, they might have a lower resting heart rate. So it's not necessarily that having a lower resting heart rate means that you're aging faster or that you're biologically old. It's just that, as you get older, your heart gets, like, loses some of its function. And, the key thing here is the HRV. So if you have a low resting heart rate but a high HRV, that means, that's the perfect combination because it means your real resting heart rate is due to your improved cardiac fitness and overall health. Low HRV and low resting heart rate is the bad combo because it means it's more reflective of, the aging phenotype. Because HRV declines with age, as well. So but mine is 100, generally would put me also in the top 1% with HRV metrics in the general population. With HRV, it's more more important to pay attention to the trends. The same way with all these markers, what's the trend line? Is it getting worse or is it getting better over time? If your HRV stays stable even if it's, let's say, 50 or 30, then that's not necessarily a bad thing. It matters more if it's, getting worse or getting better over time. Again, some, receipts, EOTRAX testing '66. Now to be to be frank with you, then, yeah, this will start in 2023, so that was two years ago. But, I've also had others in the sixties. Since then, this is just the best result best result of all time. And, since then, I've just, dialed down some of the EOTOMAX training because it's, hard to maintain. It's hard to maintain a lot of, hours with, cardio exercise. Heart rate 38, HIV over 100, breath rate, so how fast you breathe during a sleep, that's also actually an interesting marker that, again, if you're healthier, your breathing rate is a bit slower rather than fast. You're more obese, you're unfit, your heart will beat faster, and you'll also breathe faster. So let's say if you're above 16 breaths per minute then, that will be in like the bad category. Grip strength. So yeah, just squeezing the dynamometer. So one thing about grip strength is the imbalance between left and right arm. So if there's a big discrepancy between your left and right arm, then that is associated also with increased mortality. My results are pretty much stable. They're, around the same, so there's no statistical difference between these results. So that's a good thing. So that's just to keep in mind. If there's a huge discrepancy between your left and right arm, then that is associated with some health, problems. Now, what are my goals for 2026? So, you know, objectively, I am in very good fitness. I have very good fitness. So there's not that much that I could work on if I as long as I wasn't one of those other regen, but I don't wanna become like an athlete. So, so that I definitely I don't see fitness as something that you just keep progressing linearly that you just need to keep getting better and better and better. You know, at some point, you just need to maintain. Right? And you need to also look at your nutrition, your sleep, your recovery, and other relationships and those kind of things. But I do have some interesting goals for 2026. So, you know, my best pull ups are 33. I'm around one hundred and seventy kilograms with the squat. My VO2 max is maybe in the low sixties. And, here are some, like, ambitious goals I have in the fitness department. And it's kind of a symbolic interesting, result. You know, trying to get, like, 40 pull ups, 400 pound squat, a four minute mile, and a forty minute 10 k run. It would be just cool to have, like, this ultimate hybrid achievement that you can do, you know, elite level pull ups, elite level, running. And then the 400 pound squat, yes, it's elite compared to the general population, but it's not really elite in, like, a powerlifting circle. But, yeah, it will be just a symbolic nice achievement to have that I was able to do this at least once in my life. I was able to do 40 pull ups, 400 pilot squat, four minute mile, and forty minute 10 k run. That is a pretty ambitious goal because, you know, going from 33 pull ups to 40 pull ups is much harder than going from five pull ups 12 pull ups. Right? It's very easy to go from five pull ups to 12 pull ups or even 20 pull ups, but it's gonna be much harder to go from 33 to 40. But I think it's possible. I think I have it in me to, be able to do 40 pull ups at some point with some specific training. So the pull ups is easy. It's a realistic goal. The squat is also easy. I'm very close to it already. I just need a few months of some specific training and muscle memory muscle memory will kick in and I'll be able to get the 400 pound squat with also relative ease. The four minute mile though is, gonna be the hard part. So, you know, we've all heard about the story of Dannister breaking the four minute, mile record, and it's like this, you know, very legendary story. And, four minute mile is something that, you know, now thousands of athletes have already repeated, but it's not like that, you know, every person in your high school or, like, not every high school had a person who broke the four minute mile. So it is still a very prestigious achievement to have. Not everyone, not even all athletes are able to do it. So for me to be able to do do a four minute mile would require me to be very committed and dedicated to training for that. Now I don't really like running that much. Like, I've always been I've never been, like, a full runner or anything like that. So for me to be able to do a four minute mile, I would need to really train super long. It's not gonna probably able to be possible within six months or twelve months. It probably requires at least one and a half years of very committed training. But the forty minute 10 k run is, I think pretty possible for me to do. So these are kind of, like, goals I could have, for 2026. Just these are kind of just, like, side quests, fun fun achievements, to have. And I think if I were to achieve this, if I were to do this, 40 pull ups, 400 pound squat, four minute mile, forty minute 10 k run, I would probably be, like, probably the only person in in the world who's ever done this if I were to do this, because I've never seen anyone else actually do it. There might obviously, if becomes popular, there's will be more people repeating it, but, yeah, I would probably be one of the first people to ever do this. Just, yeah, kind of a fun quest to have. Grip strength, so I do think I'd like to increase my grip strength a little bit because I like forearm exercises. It's gonna be also mandatory part for me to get to the 40 pull ups. If my grip strength is stronger, I'm able to pull, hold on to the bar a bit better. I'm gonna get less fatigued. So increasing grip strength is gonna be the byproduct of me doing the 40 pull ups. My VO2 max, I'm gonna maintain. Now I don't specifically need a higher VO2 max to run the four minute mile. If I had a VO2 max of 70, then, yeah, it would make it easier probably a little bit. But running is a lot more about the form and, just the specificity. I just need to get better at running, not necessarily having a higher VO2 max. I think my VO2 max is adequate for a four minute mile. It wouldn't hurt, but I think the more important aspect is the actual form and the the skill of running. Resting heart rate, I'm gonna maintain it, 38. I don't think I need to get it lower. I wouldn't like it to get increased either, but I'll maintain around 36, 38, less than 40 is a good range, I think, for me. HRV, I'm gonna maintain as well around a 100. You know, I'm not really deliberately trying to increase my HRV. It's, yeah, just useful to gauge my exercise load and my training status. If I'm overtrained, the HRV is gonna go down. If I'm gaining too much weight, it's gonna go down. If, if it's increasing, then it's a good sign, means I'm adequately recovered. So what is the plan? What was my exercise plan for 2025? So I had a very simple exercise routine. So three to four times a week, I do resistance training, push pull leg split. And 2025, I was doing mostly calisthenics for the upper body at least. So, pull ups, dips, handstand push ups, planche, push ups, those kind of things. And, I am trying to, focus more on the strength side of things because I'm not necessarily trying to add mass. So, I'm using, weighted lift. I'm using, bands, etcetera to increase the intensity, and I'm always trying to keep the reps around five to eight reps. But I also do higher repetition works just to increase the amount of reps you do. So if you wanna train for 40 pull ups, then you need to be doing at least, you know, 30 reps, 35 reps every once in a while. The barbell squat, I was doing once a week, three to five reps, three sets of, five reps. Cardio, so 2025 was actually a time where I was doing much less cardio. So, that's also the reason why I haven't been able to break my VO2max PR of 66 because I've been just doing a lot less cardio than, what I was in 2023. So I was maybe very inconsistent with it as well, maybe doing it once a week, either HIIT cardio or zone two cardio. I was doing either some of these, like, sprint workouts, 10 sprints, a 100 meters, walk back there and repeat, so trying to keep your heart rate elevated all the time. Or these Norwegian four by four hint HIIT interval workouts, four minutes of very intense focus, so let's say 85 to 95% of your max heart rate, followed by three minutes of 60 to 70% repeated for four rounds. So it's a very brutal workout but it's, also very effective. Or I did zone two cardio, mostly cycling. I used a bicycle to, ride around in the summer, so sixty minutes of, low intensity. What's my plan for 2026? I think my workout plan is very good. Obviously, I'm getting results with it, so I'm not gonna really change much. I'm just going to, adjust it slightly. So I'm gonna still do the calisthenics, but I'm gonna increase the intensity of each session by doing more reps and adding more weight, but I'm gonna work outside less frequently. So that's my gonna be strategy for the short term. And, yeah, I'll just adjust it based on the progress. If I'm able to do, let's say, 35 pull ups, so that will be my new record, then, it means it's working. Right? If I'm not seeing the progress, then I need to adjust. Barbell squats, I'm gonna just keep doing the same. I need to be more consistent with the barbell squats to reach the 400 pound squat and that's been the limiting factor so far. I just, you know, usually just work out at home with the calisthenics. So the going to the gym takes an extra step that I'm not always able to do every week. But I'm gonna be implementing some sprinting and plyometrics as well. I think, the speed training is interesting and I think, you know, now in my thirties, I need to start thinking about the more these speed development as well, which, declines with age. So, yeah, I'm gonna implement some sprinting and plyometrics. So jumping as high as possible, jumping as far as possible, those kind of things. Zone two cardio, I'll be do so I need to build a bigger cardio respiratory base to reach the four minute mile and the forty minute 10 k. So I need to I need a huge base now. So my, let's say, cardio base is a bit lacking co compared to my pull up strength and my leg strength. So I need to build a stronger base or re rebuild it to get better at running, and that requires a lot more hours doing zone two cardio. I'll still need to do the HIT cardio as well. I'll just do once a week the HIT four by four protocol, but I'll do twice a week zone two cardio. And the reason I do the zone two instead of adding an additional HIT is because I already have several days of high intensity training. I already have three, four resistance training days per week. I already have one HIT day. So it's not gonna be possible for me to add an additional high intensity training session because it's gonna be harder for me to recover from. And, again, I'm not like a pro athlete, so I'm I don't have all the time to work out and I don't have all the time to recover. So I don't have entire days to dedicate to recovery etcetera. So that's why adding the zone two is, more appropriate because it's not as intense. I'm able to recover from it faster and it's not going to interfere with my performance with the barbell squat or performance with the pull ups, for example. Alright. So let's move on with nutrition. So this is, very controversial spicy topic always. I've been on the same nutrition plan for a few years now, so it's around 2,300 to 2,500 calories. I eat around a 130 grams of protein, so I've reduced my protein from previous years in 2025. I was eating around a 150, a 160 grams of protein previously several years ago, which would put me at the something like two gram, 2.2 gram per kilogram per body weight, mark. But now I'm eating around 130 grams of protein, so 20% less than, in the past, and this is around 1.6 grams per kilogram. So I'm eighty kilos, eighty one kilos, so this would put me at this spot. Based on the research, this is more than adequate to support muscle growth and as I said, I'm not trying to build muscle, I'm just trying to improve performance. And if you just eat a lot of protein, if, if I were to eat 200 grams of protein, then I would sacrifice the carbohydrate intake, which would, reduce my exercise performance because carbohydrates are the best fuel for high intensity training specifically. And my workout plan is very high intense in terms of pull ups, squats, and, running, hit hit running, etcetera. So I do need the carbs to support that exercise. And if I were to eat more protein, then I would just be end up eating less carbs, which would just be be counterproductive for my exercise goals. And I don't need to eat more protein. I've seen that by reducing my protein by about 20% to 1.6 grams per kilogram, my blood markers have improved, my visceral fat has decreased, my gym performance has increased because I'm, eating more carbohydrates, and my muscle mass actually also increased because 1.6 grams per kilogram is adequate for muscle growth. You don't need more more than that. So, yeah, if you eat two grams per kilogram, most of it is just waste. Carbs, yeah, I eat around 250 to 300 grams of carbs, so pretty high carb diet. And, fiber is also high because I'm eating my carbohydrates from whole food sources, potatoes, fruits, etcetera, that have the fiber in them. So if I were to be eating, you know, refined bread, white bread or sugar or something like that, then, yes, the fiber intake would be much lower. But because I'm eating healthy carbs, whole food carbs, I'm getting also a lot of fiber. And in my opinion, fiber is one of the most under underrated it's not a nutrient, but it's like a food component, there is. By increasing my fiber from around 30 grams to 40 to 50 grams, over the last five years, I've seen better blood work, better gut health, better body composition, easier fat loss, greater satiety. So just yeah. You know, it's not it's not because of the fiber, obviously, necessarily. Maybe it's other things as well. But, yeah. There's a lot of propaganda about fiber being harmful online and I do think that it's wrong. Yes, there are people who can't tolerate fiber because of certain gut problems, certain microbiome imbalances, certain food sensitivities, etcetera. Those are legitimate concerns. Right? Those individuals aren't gonna do doing good with a higher fiber diet. But personally, me almost doubling my fiber has only improved my health. And, yeah, you know, have perfect bowel movements once or twice a day. I don't have any constipation. No no gas. No no farting or anything like that. Everything is just good, by getting this fiber from healthy whole food carbohydrates, fruits, berries, potatoes, those kind of things. Fat. So 70 to 80 grams. That's, not a low fat intake. It's around maybe 25 to 30% of my calories. So, yeah. The same way with protein, you don't need insane amounts of fat. This fat intake is more than enough to cover essential functions, more than enough to support hormones and, satiety or whatever the thing is it is to improve the food texture and taste. So, yeah. I'm not a huge fan of adding a ton of olive oil or a ton of butter or eating bacon or something like that. You know, I've done similar diets in the past, the low carb, higher fat diets in the past. They didn't work that well for me at least. I do much better with a high carb diet. High carb, high fiber, lower fat, moderate protein diet. Moderate fat if if you were to be nitpicky about the percentages. So what foods do I actually eat then? Well, I'll share with you. I do like to categorize myself as eating a semi Mediterranean diet, but, it's not a full Mediterranean classical Mediterranean diet as in the clinical research because I eat a little bit more protein. I don't eat that much olive oil, and I eat more carbs as well. I eat mostly potatoes and, other things like that. So I'm eating a lot more carbohydrates than the standard Mediterranean diet, but I do, have a high polyphenol intake from, vegetables, etcetera. So vegetables, broccoli, carrots, cauliflower, peas, beetroot, squash, pumpkin, berries, blueberries, strawberries, raspberries, cranberries, something like that, fish, salmon, herring, sardines, cod, etcetera. You eat fish maybe a few times a week. And, yeah, I'm just, trying to so it's it's more reliable to try to get your omega threes from a omega three supplement in my opinion because you're not kinda eating fish every day. You're gonna forget about it. There's actually research that if you stopped consuming omega threes for a few weeks, then your omega three index would rapidly decline, which is one of the biomarker that is strongly associated with longevity as well. So I think I just find it more consistent and more reliable to just take an omega three supplement, which I'm gonna be focusing more on, but it doesn't mean that I'm not gonna be eating fish every every few few days. Beans and legumes. So, lentils, beans, chickpeas, again, this is something that worked great for me. I I obviously don't eat them every meal, but, I have no problems with these foods. I find them that they just improve my blood work over the last few years and my gut health as well. So I might be an anomaly or it doesn't apply to all people, but, for me at least, beans and legumes work very well. It improves my gut health, improves my blood work, improves satiety, makes me lose weight more easily. Meat, so I mostly eat leaner beef and game. I don't eat that much chicken. Maybe sometimes, the same with pork, not not a regular intake. So mostly like lean beef or wild game. Eggs, one to two per day on average. Some days more, some days less. Dairy, I consume actually quite a lot of dairy. Lower fat dairy, kefir, yogurt, cottage cheese, Greek yogurt. On average, like, once a day, I have some dairy. Fruit, green bananas. So I I like the starchier, greener bananas, higher fiber, lower glycemic. Kiwis, I like kiwis, for for, dinner. Apples, oranges, and pomegranate seeds. Those are kind of my go tos at the moment. And carbs, my main carbohydrate source are sweet potatoes or regular white potatoes and quinoa as well. I don't eat it very often, but, maybe once a week. Drinks, mostly black coffee, green tea, around two to three cups a day. So, coffee, I drink maybe one to two cups per day. Green tea, also one to two cups a day. So something like that on average. And I also drink chamomile tea and ginger tea in the evening. Some supplements that can be categorized as more food, protein powder, collagen peptides, and gelatin powder. So those are my go to ones. So it's not a very restrictive diet. It's not very, hard diet as well, I think. And it's been working great for me. I it's sometimes hard for me to, not lose weight for some reason. Maybe, yeah, obviously, the intermittent fasting window also contributes to that a lot, but I've been doing intermittent fasting for twelve years. But this specific way of eating has made intermittent fasting a lot more easier, at least for me. That I just it's, yeah, hard to not lose weight oftentimes. I just need to make sure that I eat enough food, especially if I exercise a lot. So supplements. Let's talk about supplements. Twenty '25, what supplements I was taking. Azaxanthin, twelve milligrams a day. Glycine, ten grams a day. Omega three is two grams a day. Melatonin, one milligram, a few times a week. Trimethylglycine, two grams a day. Magnesium, around two hundred to four hundred milligrams, a few times a week. Collagen peptides, ten grams a day. And I cycle creatine around five to ten grams a day. I don't take it all the time because creatine reduces your VO2max gains, and, I think it's better to just not take it all the time. You don't need to take it all the time. I'll take it only if I'm specific of trying to gain muscle or get stronger. What are some supplement stacks I'm gonna be taking in 2026? Most of it is gonna be the same. I'll underline the additions. So omega threes, three grams a day. I'll increase the dose. Lutein and zeaxanthin, twenty and five milligrams a day. I'll be trying that out. So it's, research, researched for eye health, reducing digital eye strain, and because I work a lot in front of the computer pretty much all day, many hours, so I just wanna use that to protect my eyes a bit more. And, you know, there's, been this research about circadian clock dysfunction and aging with the circadian clock dysfunction being soon categorized as a hallmark of aging in my opinion. So I just want to make sure that I protect my eyes from the excessive amounts of blue artificial light, which would damage the eyes and potentially damage the circadian clocks as well. But I am, full disclosure, going to come out with my own supplement line as well in 2026 quite soon. It's, gonna be third party tested, high quality ingredients, and, the reason I made it is because I wanna have a supplement stack that I trust. I know the ingredients. You know, there's a huge problem with most supplements out there. They don't contain the ingredients. They're contaminated with heavy metals, etcetera. So I wanna make sure that I control the supply line that I'm taking the supplements that actually have the ingredients for my own health. So, I don't wanna take placebo pills. I wanna take the stuff that actually works. And I'm gonna also wanna make it easier for myself. I don't wanna take ten pills a day or something. You know, I don't take that many supplements, but I don't wanna take a ton of pills. I wanna make it easy, convenient, and I wanna get the right dosages. Oftentimes, most of these, regular supplements, they just don't have the right dosage that has been clinically shown to provide certain benefits that I'm interested in. So I'm creating it for myself mostly, but I think, it will be also the best longevity stack out there in my opinion. So it's gonna contain a one powdered drink for certain ingredients, one capsule, and one soft gel. Eventually, the soft gel will come a bit later, but, these three kind of, core elements, and it will have across all three of these, will have around 30 ingredients. 30 ingredients in a very small amount of, things you need to consume at a very good price as well. The the price is insanely good for the value that you're gonna get. And, you know, I'll I'll just tell you that that I can't announce anything yet, but, you know, you will be announced You will hear about it eventually. Let's continue with sleep. So my sleep schedule in 2025 was a bit suboptimal. It was a bit, hectic mostly because I was having a lot of frequent intercontinental flights to USA, to Japan, to many other, places, UAE, etcetera. So I was doing a lot of traveling, which, you know, obviously has a toll on your, sleep and, circadian rhythms, etcetera. And plus, I also was, with some other important, commitments that made me sleep a bit shorter. So, yeah, on average, I might have slept maybe seven hours. And, my goal for 2026 is to just try to increase it a little bit. I'm gonna try to hit at least seven point five hours. But, you know, interestingly, during this year, I just stumble across a lot of, studies where it shows that seven hours might be actually more than enough for otherwise healthy people, which, you know, I've experienced myself as well. I don't feel deprived if I sleep seven hours or even six hours, but I will try to get seven hours, maybe seven and a half hours. So I'll definitely try to, you know, sleep a little bit longer. But it's not inherent it doesn't appear to damage my health, in any way. And a few other videos will be out soon where I'll discuss, this, as this, relationship between sleep sufficiency and longevity. Bedtime is always been quite stable, so 10PM and I wake up around 6AM somewhere there, I'll try to maintain it and be more consistent with it. So, you know, a lot of times I might end up going to bed at 11PM, maybe twelve, something like that because of whatever reasons. So I'll try to be more consist consistent with it this year. So, the consistency of sleep is, apparently as as important as the total duration. So I'll try to be more consistent and I'll also try to be more disciplined with the blue light. So, wearing my blue blockers, dimming out the lines, not looking at bright screens, I'll try to be more consistent with it because of the circulating clock dysfunction and aging element that I discussed earlier and because of protecting melatonin production, which is a powerful antioxidant hormone. Alright. So let's move on with the blood markers. So, I've made some other videos about my results as well. You can check it on even, on Twitter where I outline some of these results. I'll just briefly go through the results. So as I said, the more comprehensive blood panel I did in May 2025, it was, pretty optimal in terms of the major markers, hemoglobin AMOC 4.9%, that's an excellent result. So, diabetes, prediabetes is five point eight percent, so I'm well below that. The average person might have 5.5%, a generally healthier person might have 5.2%, and a person who is more controlled with their glucose levels will be 5% or lower than that. And my insulin as well is a very low, 3.35, so, you wanna keep it below seven, for example. Lipids, cholesterol, LDL, 58, HDL, 62. So higher HDL is good. Insulin sensitivity signal, lower triglycerides as well, 39. So I have very good insulin sensitivity, low insulin, low blood sugar, high HDL, and low triglycerides. My metabolic health is, excellent in terms of that. Lipoprotein a, so this genetic, it's always been kind of, lower. It's been two, it's been three, it's been four, five. So it does fluctuate obviously a little bit, but, it's, being this low consistently. So I have at least favorable genetics in terms of lipoprotein, little a, levels, which I'm happy about. ApoB, so 58. That is a very good result. I'm I'm not taking any lipid lowering drugs. I'm not taking anything that lowers cholesterol specifically. So these are all natural due to diet. And I think the biggest reason for that is because of the higher fiber intake, lower fat diet, lower saturated fat diet specifically. So, this is just achieved with, nutrition, these low APOB. And, yeah, the fiber is super underrated for cholesterol and lipids as well. H s e r p 0.1 in this particular test because it cuts off at the 0.1 mark, but I've had other tests that has 0.01, for example. Homocysteine, so this marker I've, shared about as well. It was twelve two years ago, it was nine in 2024, and, now it was a 5.97, which is, pretty close it's, like, yet close to the most optimal result of five. Homocysteine of five is the absolute best, but, below 10 is already, very good. Then, liver function and kidney profiles, so these are all, green as well. So, I'm not gonna go into all the details with this. A few, out things to point out. So cystatin c is extremely good for me, 0.67. That's, you know, can't get any better than that almost. And my eGFR is one, a 112, which is also, excellent result. My creatinine, 0.9 set nine four. So, it's not high. It's not, harmful. It's just high because of my increased higher than 0.8, for example, which is where it's been previously as well. It's, higher because of a higher exercise load, higher muscle mass. And I did see that it had dropped. This was actually after my bulk, so that's why it's a higher I had more mass that I was carrying as well. So, yeah, it's probably lower now a little bit. So creatinine is not a reliable kidney health marker because of the element of increased muscle mass and exercise raising the creatinine. So, cystamin C is, kind of a more truer marker of kidney health which I'm more focused on. And mine is, excellent. Although my creatinine is also still good in that sense. Aldamine, 4.42 in this particular test. Alkaline phosphatase, 58.6. GGT, 10.7, which is excellent. All the other liver enzymes as well, low twenties, which is good. Testosterone, seven six seven, So, not insanely high, not low either. It's kind of it's a high higher than average, but it's not, it's not very high. Does that make sense? And, you know, to be honest, I think testosterone is overrated in that sense. Yes, it matters if you have low testosterone. If your testosterone is 200, 300, then, yes, doubling your testosterone to 500 or 600 can be quite amazing. But above six hundred, seven hundred, you're not gonna notice a much huge difference. Maybe if you're gonna reach a thousand nanograms per deciliter, maybe you will notice a huge difference, but I think, you know, especially for maximum lifespan, having extremely high testosterone and other androgens is not beneficial. So there's a reason women live longer than men and, extremely high androgens, I think, are pro aging, so to say. So I'm happy with the 767. It's a level that is beneficial for body composition. I obviously have good body composition and good fitness, and I also have good drive, good motivation. I have good energy. So I'm very happy with this, above average testosterone. I don't have I have no interest in taking TRT. I need it. I have no interest in in trying to boost my testosterone to 900 or 1,000. Because I would need to eat more calories, I would need to, you know, do other things as well. Take some, testosterone boosting supplements, asparagandha, something like that to try to squeeze more testosterone, but it doesn't really support my any of my goals and I have no things that would indicate that I'm suffering from, anything in terms of hormones. My thyroid are also normal, so my t three is always on the lower end because of lower calorie intake doing some better fasting. So lower thyroid, I do think that is beneficial for longevity as long as you don't have other side effects from having low thyroid, such as you're not gaining weight, you have good metabolic health, you have good lipids, etcetera. If you have low thyroid and you have high lipids, you're gaining weight, you just feel tired, etcetera, then that's, you know, something that you would want to improve to fix your thyroid. But if you don't have those symptoms, then telothyroid might be actually more beneficial for long term maximum lifespan. Now hematology, different immune cells, I'm not gonna go into details of that. You know, there's always gonna be a few things that are out of the reference range. You know, these things just fluctuate a lot. One thing to note is my very high lymphocyte percentage, which is a more indication of youth, fifty two point six percent. So, it means I have a strong immune system, or act, like, able to respond to things. My platelet count is, lower end, which is good, lower risk of a coating. And, yeah, all these other immune cells are also in the most degrees. I'm not really, yeah, going into the details of this here. The same way with elements, so this is just halide metals that I did at my retreat in, at the clinic in India. So these are all green, Arthritis profile, green. Vitamins and minerals, so vitamin d is normal. My other nutrient intake or nutrient status is also normal except b six, which is, above the river drains. So a bit higher than that for for some reason. Iron levels are all good. So, with iron, you wanna be on the lower end as a male, especially. So mine is here is a hundred and three micrograms per deciliter. So that's, I think, a good result. So very high iron levels, might increase the risk of heart disease and, you know, that's another reason why men live shorter than women. Men have much higher iron levels than women because they don't menstruate and, you know, they they don't cut themselves either. Nowadays, mostly if if you're working in an office, you're not really, you know, cutting yourself when listing something or something like that. So, very high iron levels I do think are also bad for aging and heart disease risk. So having it around 100 is good, is a good result. It could be even lower. I think if our iron level was 70 or 80, I think that would also be fine. It might be even better, but, yeah, I'm just saying that slightly lower in iron is better than, higher. What are some goals for my blood work? So, generally, I wanna maintain it. So I'm just it's more important to maintain good blood work than to have very good blood work for a short period of time and then fall off the wagon. So, yeah, I'm as I outlined throughout the video, I'm gonna still follow my nutrition plan. I'm gonna take my supplements, sleep, and do my exercise plan. So chances are my blood work will stay around the same. Of course, blood work fluctuates every day, but, you know, the general framework is gonna be the same. Some specific goals that I have is omega three index. So right now it's eight percent, which would put me maybe in the top five percent of individuals, but my goal is to get it to ten percent and, that will be the top one percent. And this is the reason I'm increasing my omega-three intake. It's very hard to increase omega-three status. It might also be that me exercising more makes it even harder because, you know, exercise raises inflammation at least and omega-3s, your body might consume more omega-3s or require more omega-3s for that. So I might need to actually even double my omega-three intake, we'll see. But I'll try to get it to 10%, that's the ultimate goal. Hemoglobin AMOS C, so average blood sugar and glycation status, 4.9%, that's already in like top two percent of health individuals and maybe I could get it to four point eight percent. I'm not really particularly worried about that or I don't think I need to. There there's no reason to for me to try to get it to four point eight percent, and there's not very strong data that having it at four point eight percent would be better than 4.9 or 5% for that matter. So, but, I mean, would be nice to have maybe 4.8%. Another one is ALP, so 58. That's maybe around top 5%. I could get it to 50, to get it to in the top 1%. But, you know, there's also not very convincing evidence that ALP has a huge role in longevity compared to something like hemoglobin a one c, CRP, or zestatin c or VO2max or something like that. So yes, there is obviously some association with ALP levels and my level are very good in terms of the general population, but it could be slightly better. It's just that I'm not really trying to specifically improve this number. I've seen people who don't exercise at all and they have ALP of forty, forty five, which in some association studies would be considered the absolute best. But in others not. So, depends a lot what we're talking about. And as I said, rather than focusing on one specific marker, you need to look at the whole picture. Would you would you rather have a VO2 max of 60 or ALP of 45? Well, I would always take the VO2 max of 60 because the VO2 max of 60 has a much stronger and more consistent association with longevity and reduced mortality. And for me to drop my ALP, I would probably need to reduce my exercise, which I don't think is worth it. And, I would also probably need to stop increasing my bone density. So ALP could be, a marker of, like, increasing bone density over bone growth, essentially. So, again, I don't think it's a good trade off to, not build the bone mass, especially when, especially for some individuals who might have low bone density. Now my bone density is already good. I don't necessarily need to improve it, but, I would much rather keep the things that I'm doing rather than try to micromanage this one specific marker to get it 1% better. Albumin, the same. You know, it's 4.6, 4.4, something around there, top 5%. Maybe it's if I were to get it to 4.8, could be better. But, yeah, 4.8, for that, I would just need to increase my calorie intake or to eat more protein again. So it's a trade off again. Albumin is the most abundant protein in the blood in the blood, so, if I were to eat more protein, maybe I would see an increase in albumin. But, again, eating more protein would have some other side effects that I wouldn't maybe want. Maybe it will increase my visceral fat. Maybe it will do some other things to my body composition that I wouldn't necessarily want. Alright. And lastly, I'll cover some of these auxiliary routines, so just some bonus stuff that aren't super important. Obviously, walking is important, but it's not a separate section. So I'll aim to walk 10 to 12 k steps every day. I've incorporated weighted vest walking as well already in 2025. I think it's awesome. I think it's very good. It makes weight loss easier because you have to carry the weight around. And if you just wear even a small weighted vest like five, ten kilos in your everyday activities, like when you're working, when you're going to the kitchen, then, that also has been seen to support weight loss and reduce the decline in metabolic rate that happens during weight loss. So I'm a actually a huge fan of weighted vests now. And I'm gonna get like a very light vest, five, ten kilos, and I'm gonna get a super heavy vest, 30 to 40 kilos for doing weighted calisthenics and, hiking. So it's also kind of low zone one, zone two cardio if you have a heavy vest and you're walking. Saunas, I've been doing them for since I was born. Pretty much I've been doing them, yeah, since the age of one pretty much from Estonia. And I'll keep taking them, like, four times a week. It's one of the most powerful, activities in observational studies for reducing heart disease and Alzheimer's risk. It's on par with, like, cardiovascular exercise in my opinion, although cardiovascular exercise is still better. Sauna is very close second. My protocol is like twenty minutes at 70 degrees Celsius and that's it. I'll try to do some more ice baths, mostly because they just dilute, and I might get like a small ice dunk where I'll be able to jump immediately from the ice, from the sauna to the ice. I don't think the cold exposure has that much evidence compared to sauna for health benefits, but, can still be, can still make you feel good. Raw cacao drink. So there's been some interesting studies about how consuming high flavonoid cacao during, sedentary periods of time, so it's like sitting, prevent the prevents the decline in, this endothelial reduction in endothelial function that happens when you're sitting. So sitting is bad, obviously, but if you consume high flavonoid raw cacao or dark chocolate high flavonoid dark chocolate, it's easier with a raw cacao because you get more of them. But, that pretty much helps to maintain better arterial health when you're sitting. So for example, someone might experience this is just a little bonus. I thought I might add some something new I've, seen in a recent study. So, yeah, I might implement more raw cacao into my daily, diet so that, yeah, it's better for the endothelial function. And, I'll also experiment with more hydration and electrolytes, you know, because I'm gonna be exercising more, sweating more, I might need more electrolytes. And who knows, maybe consuming more electrolytes and salt, which I so far haven't done that much, I've, like, actually, like, never really consume electrolytes regularly. Maybe that's gonna be, like, unlocking my performance. Maybe that's gonna unlock my four minute mile. Let's see. But I will probably need to get more electrolytes to support that goal anyway. And, more frequent naps. So research about napping is also very bullish. So, people who take more naps, they have lower heart disease, greater longevity as long as they meet also the physical exercise requirements. So, yeah, napping is gonna be good for for me to, catch up on some lost sleep, essentially. Peptides, you know, I'll maybe do PPC, especially if I might get injured from doing a lot of exercise. And, but it's not something that I I really don't need, I think. And I'm not really interested in other peptides as well, maybe GHK, so copper peptide. I already use a topical copper peptide for skin benefits. So, yeah. That's it. Alright. So, that's the end of this video. If you reach the end, then thank you for watching. I think this was very interesting, at least it was for me. I'll try to make more kind of this unique style content rather than just making a very generic topic, content. I'll, you know, maybe try to implement more of these kind of unique videos I think no one has ever really done on YouTube. But if you wanna, you know, learn more about how I think about these things, what's, my gauge on the research, then, check out this tier list where I ranked a 100 health activities from worst to best. So, it just outlines all these possible, the most fringe, health activities all the all the way to the most fundamental activities and how do I rank them. So check out that video next.