We know for a fact that if you are in a lower twenty five percentile of v o two max, you are twice as likely to be ill twice the amount that that blows my mind. More is never more. Balance is more. Doctor Eli, welcome to the show. Thank you for having me. I appreciate it. Yeah. We, met, I think, like two a few weeks ago at this conference and where we both spoke at. And one of the my my, acquaintances or friends, he introduced me to you as someone who had a VO2 max of 70 in their fifties, which is a very phenomenal, result. So So I was, of course, very interested to know who you are and, you know, how did you achieve such a feat of fitness. So, yeah, I'm, happy to speak with you today. Thank you so much. Thank you. I've I've always admired what you do and how you do it. It's incredible. I think you are the isn't it the the the number one youngest biological biologically? Isn't that right? Like, in the in the world right now? In the Olympics? Well, I mean, depends on I I don't think so. I'm I'm sure there's, many people with a lower score and, you know, this the validity of these tests can be debated about, but, It's still super impressive, Sim. Please don't don't don't be so humble. It's still super impressive. Right. Well, thank you. But, yeah, I mean, you know, in the podcast, I wanted to talk about, what you do. You have a center in Dubai. You do a lot of our coaching. You, are also obviously walking the talk. So, yeah, I think we'll have a very interesting discussion. So I wanted to start off with, how did you get into this health optimization and, just longevity and wellness? Yeah. Of course. So, you know, I I don't know what your journey is like, but with me, at some point, I think for most people that I've discussed this with or discussed their own wellness journey, there's always like a pivotal event that gets you into, this path. For me, as I was going through it and I began introspection and working on my, kind of trauma release and things like that, I realized it started earlier than I than I thought it did. So I grew up in in Beirut, Lebanon, as a teenager, and the time was very, very, tumultuous. There was so much happening. And I'm an only boy, And they were basically picking up anyone who was able to kind of be on the street or fight or whatever. And obviously, you know, I was trying to very desperately to avoid that. So, I launched into, physical fitness. So I began calisthenics at maybe the age of 14, and, I really focused on it. Now, later on in life, fast forward, you know, a couple of decades, when I started working on myself a little bit more seriously, I realized that this was my protective mechanism that that put me on a path, ironically, of of wellness for all my life. So what started as a as a point of adversity and self protection, turned out to be a a lifelong journey of of, the pursuit of well-being. And then obviously the my life is punctuated with these events, you know, either family members are sick with cancer or, you know, heart problems or whatever, all of this different stuff around you. And then they kind of this acts as, like, another launchpad for you to kind of delve deeper, do more, understand better, and so on. And then I I opened my first, corporate wellness business, in 2006, 2005 in Dubai, which then became a lot more, focused on on that side. And granted earlier than what most people were doing, but only because I didn't think of it as a business. I thought of it as a as a lifestyle as, you know, everyone is doing it, be it at work, at home, or at school, or wherever you are. So, and hence where the journey kind of officially began. And then I launched into mountaineering, marathons, anything that could basically get my hands on. And then down the line, I eventually did more than 50 marathons, climbed quite a few mind mountains around the world, did quite a few treks, all sorts of stuff, that kind of put your body into, into the test to to say the least. And therefore, this took me in another rabbit hole where I wanted to understand how can I, keep my body optimized, And that's really what I do right now? So, yeah, the center that you mentioned is called Restore, and we focus on one of the main pillars of my journey and the program and my talks and everything that I do, which is recovery. It's the most understated pillar in everything that we do, and it's where adaptation and strength actually happens. I hope you agree with that. And then obviously, I run a program called limitless human. And with that, I integrate pillars, together, including recovery and several others, a lot of the things that you yourself talk about and and, sort of, work around. But the the the slight difference for me is that as a Middle Eastern man living in The Middle East, I focus on that and all of the, the influences that are around us, be it in lifestyle, be it in culture, be it in family life, be it in in the pace of business, be it the dust, the water, the sun, the heat, like, all of these different things. So these are all taken into consideration into what we do in the program, from a lifestyle perspective or from, a medical intervention perspective, which is a tiny part of it. We focus a lot more on, sort of, lifestyle, because the you know, for for us, most of the people that we deal with are already healthy individuals that want to go to the next level. So therefore, you know, that it's it's been a lifelong thing. And then when I realized in my forties that I am fitter than most people around me, I I realized that I was doing something right. And then in my fifties now, you know, with extremely low, body fat percentage, high HRV, high VO two max, I seem to have cracked for me, what works. You know, so and and, to to spoiler alert, all of it were allow revolves around, recovery. Gotcha. Yeah. I definitely agree that recovery is a very underrated aspect of, health and longevity. And like you said, that's where the magic happens. But I guess, you know, recovery is only warranted if you put in the work or if there is a reason to recover from. So let's say if you, you know, never lift weights or never do exercise, then Yeah. I mean, yeah, there's a lot of other stressors in the environment that are, you know, harmful to us and we would need to recover from. But, you know, the growth happens only if you first, you know, put in the stimulus, which is the positive adaptation or the positive, like, the signal to the body in the form of exercise, and then the recovery is where the magic happens. So I guess, yeah, there's for some individuals, it could be the danger that they need to relax too much, which, you know, is, you need both. You need to have, like, the stimulus and the recovery which, you know, your your protocols, focus on. Yeah. And and they confuse it also with with rest or comfort. So with so many escalators, so many conveniences, so many people are, you know, they're they're they treat that, you know, as like, something that I deserve to do. Why walk if I can stand? Why stand if I can sit? Why walk from one place to another if I can drive and so on. You know? So also, these these small lifestyle adaptations can contribute greatly to your recovery. So recovery is not passive, but, also, it's not as enjoyable as activity. Right? So people, don't they don't look forward to it, until you realize how much benefit you get from that versus what you do. Now the only slight difference I would say with us here is that, the the strain that we also get beyond the exercise and on our muscles, and on on other systems, is also the strain of our environment. And I think you'll begin to feel it too, you know? There are stuff that we need to detox from. There are there's our approaches here that we need to be doing, you know, to be able to sustain. Like, for example, I get people that are well recovered. They work out well. They move. They're healthy, all of that, but then their HRV is is very low in their twenties or thirties. So they're extremely active people. They're very serious about their recovery, but the nervous system is is really under huge loads. So recovery covers all of not just your biological system, but also your nervous system. So, not just the muscular skeletal, system, but also the the the nervous system. So, I focus a little bit on that too because I find for myself is that I wake up energized and ready for the gym to kind of have a proper session when also my nervous system is aligned. So I find myself, you know, kind of recovered and my, you know, I'm I'm okay to kind of do things. But when my HRV is slightly lower, I don't perform as well as I can. And also your mind starts playing tricks with you with that too. One less rep, skip this exercise, you know, that sort of thing. Like, sit down a little bit more. So you begin to kind of, sort of, go into shortcuts, if you know what I mean. But, yeah, I a 100% agree with you that, people can go the opposite direction just like with everything. I find people that go into training way too much, especially women, and end up with all sorts of, hormonal issues. Same with men, you know? And they don't realize how because they look super healthy, they look super fit, that doesn't mean that you are healthy. So, and I think you see that quite quite quite a lot with, in your work too. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. It's, tends to be a lot of, this or the other. So, like, a a lot of exercise and not enough recovery or too much recovery and not enough exercise or too much cardio and not enough weights or just weights and no cardio. So, yeah, it's a more balanced for sure. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But, maybe, yeah, we can start with the fitness component. So, VRT max of 70, that's, you know, very, very extremely good result, especially for some are in their fifties. You're you said you're, like, 55. Right? I'm 54. Just turned 54 this month. Yes. Okay. Yeah. So that's, you know, definitely in the, you know, top I would say even, like, top 0.1% of VO2max, for people in their fifties. So, were you an athlete, or you obviously had you had a history of exercise, but how long did it take for you to, like, get this, particular So to be honest, I I didn't take my VO2max very seriously until, I began the journey with limitless human about, five years ago. And this is when I included it in my in my program as the number one, metric that we use for people to help them become healthier. So be ahead of anything else, ahead of genome, ahead of blood tests, ahead of everything else. So we focus on VO two max. We focus on, sort of, general strength of the body alignment, even grip strength and and foot strength and things like that. And then the other things come second. So then I began to pay attention to my VO two max. Now, given my history in in marathons, I I I think I was naturally already in a good place as VO two max without without actually working actively working on it. So, therefore, I I already had a good base, and then I was able to build on it and keep up keep at it. And as I was exploring my journey, what works for me physically and, you know, for my age and and what I do, And, obviously, I live, a very modest lifestyle. I'm not, I'm not big on, socializing or going up late, or I don't drink, for example. There's a lot that I don't do that affect my system and kind of because as you said earlier, it's complete balance. There there are no specific hacks that you can do, for example, to improve VO two max or HRV or whatever it is that you're working on. It's it's a combination of things. There are some that are more influential, but it's a combination of all of these things. So I was already at a good place to be fair. And then, therefore, what I was able to do is try to understand what was impacting my VO two max. What is it that was, affecting it? And I realized that, you know, I can train it. I could do, hit high intensity intervals that directly contributed by understanding what my zones are, what my, ventilatory thresholds are, I was able then to work on improving them. Because as exactly what you do, you measure, you understand, you fix, you move on, etcetera, etcetera. So it's the same, with, with VO two max. You measure, first of all, test it. Find out what your actual VO two max is, not the one on your wearable. Most people take this for granted because even though wearables, they actually do, life or even they buy data from proper VO2 max testing equipment in order to calibrate their algorithm to give a good estimate of what your possible VO2 max is based on the data that is being collected by the wearable is still not accurate. Right? So, it's, you know, it's not the wearable is not a 100% infallible when it comes to sort of exercise what you're doing. It's measuring temperature, heart rate, movement, a few things, and these are none none of them are measuring the amount of air coming in and the amount of air coming out of your lungs. So, therefore, it's an estimate. So I highly recommend for people to actually do a VO two max, test Yep. And then understand their true metrics. And then it acts as as a base that you could build upon no matter what age you are in. And we know for a fact that, if you are in a lower 25 percentile of VO two max, number, you are twice as likely to be ill twice twice the twice the amount. That that blows my mind. You know? We're already fragile. Imagine if you double that that risk, later on in life to have chronic diseases, heart problems, diabetes, all sorts of other things, including, sort of, brain situations. You know? So, I take it seriously because I don't I'm I am not aware. Let me put it this way. I'm not aware of a better longevity metric than VO two max. So therefore, if you're serious about, you know, living your life healthy until the last moment to have the longest possible health span, you have to prioritize VO two max. I wanna take a quick break to tell you about the Boncharge infrared sauna blankets, my go to way of getting twenty minutes sauna sessions on the go without needing to spend an hour to warm up a regular sauna. Taking the sauna is, in my opinion, one of the best things for your overall health and heart function. Studies show that taking a sauna regularly is associated with sixty three percent lower risk of sudden cardiac death, sixty three percent reduced heart disease mortality, forty six percent lower risk of hypertension, and forty percent reduced all cause mortality. This is mediated by an increase in body temperature and increased heart rate that mimic a cardiovascular workout, while at the same time improving arterial stiffness, endothelial function, blood flow, immune system function, blood pressure, and metabolic health. It doesn't matter if it's a traditional wooden sauna, an infrared sauna, an infrared sauna, an infrared sauna blanket, or anything else that elevates your body temperature above what's normal. It warms up in two minutes to the optimal temperature of 70 degrees Celsius, and it's low in EMF. You can get a 15% discount by heading over to boncharge.com/seamlund, and use the code seam for 15% discount. Alright. Back to the video. Yeah. Absolutely. I I agree. And, you know, it is just a collection of a lot of, systems in your body. So to have a good VO2 max, you need to have a well functioning heart. Mhmm. You need to have a well functioning lungs, well functioning muscle system. You need to probably be on a lower body fat side of things. Mhmm. You need to be doing exercise on a regular basis. Mhmm. You know, you need to be recovering well. So it's, yeah, like a single marker for, pretty much everything yet you do. It's your, like, like, your health lifestyle, biomarker in a lot of, ways. Agreed. Agreed. 100%. And my favorite bit about it is that you cannot cheat on it. There's nothing you could actually take to directly influence it. You cannot work out for two weeks and then ace a VO two max test. You know? Yeah. It's it's it's a definitive lifestyle metric or biomarker. Like, there there is no way around it. Yes. You know, breath work, hyperbaric, lots of little things that may help, but truly, it's that that that complete collection of of, sort of organs, lifestyle, even, you know, what's happening with your nervous system and so on, that, that contribute to it. Yeah. You can't yet cheat on it because, you might be able to with some, like you said, hyperbaric or some breathwork technique, you could very short term increases maybe by a little bit, but I would imagine maybe 20%. But, yeah, you're not gonna be able to go from unfit to fit in just even even a few weeks or months even. Whereas with, you know, certain, let's say, longevity tests out there, maybe certain biological age tests or something like that, you, you know, you can see a lot of, variety in the results. You can, you know, be otherwise unhealthy, but for some reason, get a very good biological age score Yeah. Because of the variety or unpredictability of those, particular tests, at least the commercial ones. So yeah. But, yeah, you mentioned that, you establish a baseline with, knowing what your VA two max is, and you took a very scientific approach to the training. So you see when you for those of you who don't know you, when you do a VO2max test, you're running on the treadmill, you're breathing in with the oxygen mask, measuring your heart rate, and by the end of the test, you get your VO2max result, but you also get these, different heart rate zones based on the test. So it will estimate what your max heart rate, what's your zone two, zone three, zone four, so different heart rate zones. And each of these different heart rate zones has, you know, slightly different, obviously, just doing cardio, just, you know, running and whatever type of running will increase your VO2 max. But if you know your heart rate zones, you can be, I guess, more scientific about it and, I guess faster as well because you're more accurate with it rather than just going for runs and just hoping for the best, hoping for your year to Mexico up. You're actually looking at the data and then structuring your workout plan around your particular body and what your heart rate zones are. Yeah. And I found also without obsessing, because when I when I obsessed about it, it actually affected my VO2 max negatively because I was being stressed, my cortisol was higher, I wasn't able to run as comfortably as I would run, but I'm not as comfortably or any cardio that I was doing. So without obsessing, this is the key because there are no the needle is not, it does not move from one to the other. It's more about averages, and how you can kind of fit within that particular zone and how much time you spend in it rather than, am I here? Am I there? Like, let me look at my zones every two minutes as I'm running. Like, that adds to and and I went through that. I had to learn the wrong way the the the the hard way, that doing that can contribute negatively to my overall well-being, but also to my VO two max. So, yeah, surely, I mean, there is no better way than to approach things scientifically, especially when it comes to your health. We know for a fact how much science have contributed to our longevity and and our lifestyle and and overall life quality in general. So when you're approaching it, okay, I'm I'm running, I'm going to the gym three, four times, etcetera, your your health deserve deserves a lot more than that. And you and I, I think we are testament to this, to the amount of time that and and care that we spend on our health in order to stay optimal, which then permeates. I don't know about you, but for me, it permeates into everything else in my life, like how my relationships are, how my business is running. Because when you're healthier, you're clearer mind, you're making better decisions, you're more patient, you're able to withstand more, you you you do more. So it's a combination of all these things, and it's a gift that keeps on giving. So that's why if I put VO two max in the center of this, I don't think there's anything better to replace it with. I don't know if anyone can prove me wrong, but so far, this is what I know. Yeah. Yeah. For sure. I I agree with that. So, you figured out your heart rate zones and you trained according to that. You also said you did marathons before Yeah. Trying to deliver to increase your VO2 max. So you had a very good base. So, more like a low intensity aerobic base. Exactly. So you did, you know, tons of hours of, just running at this, low intensity Right. Closer to more like zone two style of training. And then you started to incorporate more interval training if if I'm not mistaken. Correct. Yes. So the high intensity has actually increased my, resilience and increased my, the my zones also. And therefore, I was able to do more at higher intensity than I was able to do before. So if I'm doing sprints, for example, now I'm able to to maintain that even for seconds, more, it's a massive impact on your overall system. And therefore, your your lungs are able to, receive more and process more oxygen into the body and therefore provide more energy for the muscles and so on. So, yeah, I mean, it's, it's not rocket science. It's simply, you know, consistency. It's simply understanding your base, working on that base and be being, consistent with them without adding too much anxiety to yourself. And understand that a combination of these different zones between high intensity, between zone two, between, doing a variety of cardiovascular rather than sticking to one, because cycling, sorry, running is a high impact sport. Right? So your knees will, you know, feel it, your ankles will feel it, your hips will feel it, your lower back will feel it, etcetera. So I would do a variety. So I I do, for example, you know, quite a bit of cycling also, which is super important as you see behind me. So for me, that's really important. I do a lot of uphill hiking or mountain climbing, that also is a is an amazing, cardiovascular activity, and it's in nature. You're you're clean you're breathing cleaner air instead of being on the road, and so on. You know? So it's a combination of these things. So when you take it seriously, you're able to, sort of plan a little bit better. And as, you know, you and I know, when when something is a priority, it just everything falls into place. You know? Yeah. I think for most people that say, oh, I whatever I whatever I'm trying, I'm not able to improve my VO two max. Well, that for me simply translate is that it's not your priority. You like it because you want to have it, but you're just simply not committing enough of your, time and and mental space for it. Yeah. Yeah. I I agree that the combination of exercise is key here, at least, over the long term. I've never seen really anyone with a very high VO2 max. I'm talking like sixties and seventies who just does interval training. Like everyone who has a very high VO2 max above the sixties, they, you know, build up a huge aerobic base with low intensity training of over many years, and then, they also do some form of interval training. So, you know, based on the research, both of these methods can increase your ear to max. Some of these shorter term trials, they show that high intensity is more time efficient in a sense that you're getting the same effects, but you're, you know, spending a lot less time exercising. So a lot of people conclude that the high intensity interval is as good and you just save time and you don't need to do low intensity cardio. But, yeah, as I said, everyone who has a very high VO2 max, especially later in life, they've accumulated a ton of hours of this low intensity exercise as well, and they obviously do some interval training, as well. 100%. Yes. And being aware being aware of your resilience, being aware of your HRV also contributes to it in my experience. I don't know how true it is for everyone else or or if there's any actual scientific backing to that, but that's from my own experience. HRV is, was a a great contributor to my VO2 max because I felt it, indirectly, not necessarily directly, but indirectly. So may when may when my HRV is a little bit lower, I wasn't able to do as much exercise as I want to, only because of maybe, not enough patience, not enough focus. Generally, my my mental state was not where it needs to be in order for me to achieve these things that I really care about. So, managing your nervous system, I think, is very, very important. And, people take that for granted too. Mhmm. Yeah. You mentioned that when you did interval training, you were able to, like, push the zones higher. Yeah. So, and I think that applies also to your maximum heart rate. So as you get fitter, your, maximum heart rate is slightly able to increase. Yes. Whereas with age, it tends to decrease or counteract with some of that age related decline. And usually, you know, the maximum heart rate is said to be calculated with two twenty minus your age. Mhmm. But, you know, that that obviously doesn't apply if you're a slightly fitter individual compared to your age. So, what is your idea of how how can people estimate their max heart rate and how can they calculate their zones from there? So that definitely, so the the formula that you shared, the two twenty minus your age, is a very, very generic one. So at at that one is kind of like the absolute, minimum, if you like. And when someone is training, like the average Joe, that's the that's the the the kind of measure that you would use so you don't get into a danger zone. But as someone like you and I that do this quite a bit, we understand how we can push that into a particular area that is still under our control, and be be aware of it. And I I feel my max heart rate without looking at it. I I know when when I've reached my max heart rate without having something to tell me that I've reached it. And, there is no better I mean, obviously, lifestyle again matters. So if you're eating fried food, if you're not eating heart healthy stuff, if you don't include, you know, olive oil, if you don't include, you know, heart healthy, nutrition, and if you don't move enough, it's, gonna impact you. So when you're working on improving your max heart rate, and for me, again, that's really important, not just from a VO two perspective, which is the main goal that I work when it comes to my health span, but also as a general lifestyle, you know, I I I see people in their twenties going up a flight of stairs and being out of breath. Like, for me, that blows my mind. We know for a fact that our last, decade or two of our lives, this is where, you know, we are most miserable, but also it's the time where we can have perhaps some of the best time of our lives, you know, with wisdom, with and if you have, and I say this all the time, one of my favorite thing about this decade for me in my fifties is that I have I've gained quite a bit of wisdom, and I'm still seeking quite a bit, but also I kept my vitality. So to have these two together is incredible. You know? So, and and it it contributes so much to, the sort of life satisfaction in everything that you do. So pushing your max heart rate, I think, should and it's it's a byproduct, I believe, of working on your VO two max. It's not necessarily something that you should only focus on. If you're serious about your VO two max, you are most likely improving your max heart rate anyway. And, again, goes back to the same thing that you and I were saying about the variety of exercise truly matters. So, the body is capable is far more capable than we think. And then we end up kind of, putting it in a little box. We say, I do I play paddle, or I do CrossFit, or I do this. While the body is is I mean, you know, for for millennials, we've been, you know, shifting, moving, digging, carrying, you know, pushing, pulling, all sorts of different things. And all of a sudden, if you go and sit on a machine and do a few things, this is a workout. The body is far more capable than that. So doing a variety of things is not just good for the body, for your VO two max, for your overall joint health and and everything, but also is good for the mind because it's more, sort of involving the mind if you like. So I try to be as as as, varied as possible, within kind of reason because, obviously, you know, there's a lot going on in my life. So that's why I have, you know, my bike in my office, literally. I have the sauna in my office, literally. So I have no excuses. And that's what I feel that these, devices, are meant for convenience rather than to replace, what what you would, do normally. You know? So, and I and I I quite like that. So I I don't give myself excuses not to do something that is good for me. And Sona is another one, that contributes to heart health, to better b o two, contributes, I say, does not influence it directly. And, yeah, overall, you know, other systems that then can they consider they, contribute to a better heart health and a better VO two max. So, these these, few tools that you could have in your in your toolkit will will will come a long way with you to get you to where you need to be. As I said, at the beginning, if you prioritize your health, which, you know, everyone should. Mhmm. Yeah. Absolutely. And, yeah, like you what you said that, the increase in max heart rate is more like a byproduct of the training and the byproduct of having a high VH max, you know, does doesn't make sense to specifically try to focus on that. It's more of, yeah, as you get fitter, you know, the max heart rate tends to increase and improve. And, you know, in some ways, that can also apply to VO2max. So that, yes, you, obviously, can use VO2max as a metric of your general overall health and fitness, but, you know, the metric for improving VO2max is, you know, how fast how well are you able to do cardio, so how fast are you able to run. You know, you can you can use some proxy tests as well to estimate your VO2 max like a Cooper test or a one mile run or something like a like a Yeah. Like a 10 ks run or something like that. Yeah. And as as you get fit fitter in those particular tests, then it means that your VO2 max has improved, in most cases. Yeah. It's very rarely that it wouldn't improve but, you know, if you're able to run a 10 ks faster or a Cooper test faster, then your VO2 max is also higher. And, you know, you wanna you're not able to test the VO2 max every day or even like most people will test it maybe once a year. So, on on this kind of a training cycle side of things, you focus on just running faster. The same way if you're trying to build muscle or get stronger, you're focusing on the lifts, that, you know, trying to lift more or do more push ups or do more pull ups, whatever the case, may be. Yeah. Yeah. I I you you touched on something super important also, the frequency of testing VO two max. People are so enthusiastic sometimes, and they wanna test it every three months or every six months. That's too short. As we said earlier, there VO two max is not influenced in in short periods of time. It is a a longer time lifestyle, and therefore, you know, less than a, you know, once a year, I don't think unless you're someone who is really doing a lot and that's their focus, maybe it's what you do as a profession, maybe you're an athlete. But as a general joe like myself, you know, once a year is more than enough, to kind of do that. And then beyond that, what you said is exactly right. There are several ways where you feel that your VO two is mine. So if you are, if you feel better that this time that you've done 10 k versus the one, you know, you were doing it last month, you're most likely having better VO two max. You're absolutely right. You don't have to test it every month in order for you to where you were to know where you are. And then, obviously, also, you know, trackers, wearables, etcetera, will hopefully show an improvement in your VO two max. Again, as we said earlier, it is not, an accurate measure, but they may give you an indication that, yes, my VO two max is improving too. So I wouldn't run every, you know, two, three months to a place where to do my VO two max, as as a health metric. But, there are many other ways for you to kind of feel that your VO two max is improving. Because a lot of different aspects of your life improve too. Even your metabolism improves, your hormones improve, your sleep improves. A lot of things kind of fall into place, which is awesome. Yeah. Maybe we touch a bit on more, like, practical things. So Yep. You know, what is your, I guess, go to workout that you do, and, like like, how long should people do when they're doing low intensity cardio, and what kind of intervals do you think are more, effective? Yeah. So for me, obviously, I always say for me because for my height, my weight, my age, etcetera, you know, the amount of food that I take, what my BMI BMI is, all of that, I kind of I don't again, I don't stress on any of that, but I take that into consideration and I apply this. So most people want to copy someone else's workout routine. That doesn't apply, and I think hopefully you agree with that with me. Some things may be intriguing, you know, you wanna try, etcetera, but you have to work on developing a workout routine that works for you. There may be similarities, between people. That's great, but you have to work out something. So for me, no two days look the same. I really value, sort of the variety of workouts that I do, and I it contributes greatly because I truly value one of my, in my in my top 10 things is is mental health. So I actively include types of workouts that also contribute to my mental health. So it could be, maybe a circuit that I would implement in in in my workouts. For those that don't know what a circuit is, is that when you have, several types of workouts kind of one after the other where you would do certain reps in this one, a certain, sort of movement in that one, and it could be a combination of functional as well as maybe high intensity. And I like doing that because it keeps my mind sharp, because you have to keep track of what you've done for how long going through the next one, etcetera, etcetera. So it makes it a little more engaging, would therefore engaging my mind a little bit more. So I value that quite a bit, and I highly recommend for people, especially as they as they reach their forties, to, take their mental health a lot a lot more seriously, and, sort of focus on that. But going back to the workouts, so no two days look the same for me, and, I try to do as much of a variety as I possibly can. On most days, I try to work out twice a day. If I don't if I'm not able to work out, and two workouts per day may seem extreme for certain people, but by a workout, I would mean in the morning, for example, if I've done high intensity, interval workouts where maybe it could be like a High Rock style workout, in the evening, to help me wind down, I would do maybe twenty minutes on my on my bike, on a zone two type situation. It helps me sleep. It helps me to detox. It helps to activate my lymphatic system, and, it also helps my metabolism and so on. So I normally do it after my last meal. I eat early in the evening. That's really important for me, but I eat, protein rich, so it doesn't affect my blood sugar overnight, so it doesn't interrupt my sleep and and things like that. So, so most days I work out twice a day. If I'm not able to, I go for a walk after dinner. If let's say I don't feel like it, if I feel like my body doesn't really need that workout today, I go for a walk at least about three kilometers, three to five kilometers, which then is about, you know, thirty minutes maybe or thirty five minutes, something like that, or forty minutes. So that is incredible. I find walking is perhaps, one of the best exercises, you can have. The only problem with it is that it's time consuming. And especially in our, part of the world, it's not always possible. I have a, a, walking pad in in my desk. As you could see, I'm in a standing desk. I never I never sit down. I try not to sit down as as much as I can because having my core activated is also part of, if you want, my my workout routine across. I go to the gym, for example. People literally be waiting until they find the nearest parking space next to the entrance. I literally go to the end of the parking because that's part of my workout, is the walk from the car to the, you know? So Yeah. It becomes a mental thing. And these these small things that you do in between, in my case, I feel they contribute more to my fitness than the actual forty five minutes or sixty minutes or, you know, ninety minutes of a workout overall. You know? So, and if you if you combine them all from, you know, your your the amount of walking that you do, how you, you know, going to the airport, for example, is another pet peeve of mine because people would go to the airport on a flight, you know, they're going on a flight for seven, eight hours, and they reach the airport, and they're desperately looking for the first chair they could find to sit on, even though they're gonna be sitting on the plane for seven to eight hours. So for me, being aware of that, I, like, I I would not sit down until I absolutely have to on the plane, you know, for many reasons that we don't need to go into right now. But, it's it's also, like, your approach and being aware of this. And as I said earlier, when you are, when you're focused on your health, then everything that you do, be it from food to hydration to movement to driving to, driving, to, you know, what you do throughout the day contributes to your fitness journey, beyond like a one hack type of exercise. But marketers, influencers, and so on on social media want to teach you the best, bicep workout. You know? And oddly enough, people, because of my age, you know, and I don't know, maybe one of the reasons of my age, but I get the most comments on my biceps. Like, what is your workout routine for your biceps? And I I I do not have one. It's a combination of everything that I do. Like, they think I have a hack to build my biceps. It's just I move always, and it's it's, it's not something that I would focus on specifically. But, unfortunately, a lot of the noise that is out there, you know, want to give you hacks. Your, you know, seven minute abs and, you know, the best bicep workout ever and and this and that. So it's more aesthetics rather than health based. And that's why I for a lot of people, maybe, six out of 10 people are turned off by me when I say my focus is VO two max. This is what we're gonna do in your journey of health. This is when you join limitless human. That's one of the first things that we'll test. People don't want that. They want the hack. How can I get from a to b the quickest way possible? And as you and I know, this never works. It works for a short period maybe. You know, if if it's done strategically, it may help an existing well established system, but it is not is not a health journey for sure. So, variety is key. I move throughout the day and sometimes work out twice a day. I challenge myself even if I am on a treadmill, I try not to do the same thing twice, either with incline, decline, speed, sort of, having a weighted vest. I've I've I'm always, shocking the body one way or the other, in order not for it to get into a comfort zone and plateau. And then the other side of that, as we said at the beginning, recovery. And that's easier than most people think, but recovery is perhaps the most influential thing that you could do, in your workout journey. What kind of recovery strategies do you use? So the the number one for me is and I I I'm yet to find something better, more influential overall is sleep. So I prioritize my sleep. So I aim and I actively work on that. So I I aim to get, seven and a half hours of sleep, lots of deep unrest, lots of sleep and REM. And I sleep at 08:30 in the evening. It's when everything kinda goes most days, obviously, unless there is something that needs to happen. And I wake up at four, and this is where my journey starts. So, and, I found that there are lots of other things that you could do that are helpful, when you're recovering, such as mindful walking, breath work, red light, sauna is definitely on the top of the list too. All of these things, all of these tools are great. But my best so far my best, you know, by far is sleep, the quality of that, and being able to, be intentional with it, from a from a mental perspective, from physical perspective, from general recovery, you know, everything. I think there nothing beats sleep. So you do all of these other things to help to improve sleep that is has the greatest return on investment. But also I find that, being in nature, moving in nature, is is incredibly healing for the body and the mind. That's why I I do on a monthly basis. Every month, I do, like, a public hike where, you know, I people meet me just in somewhere here, and then we hike up a mountain. We see the sunrise. We breathe, you know, sort of mountain rocky mountain air, and then we come back. That is also another sort of pit stop in my recovery. So just like every approach that I have, it's not, a specific hack, but more of a recovery lifestyle, a fitness lifestyle, a nutritional lifestyle. And I think if more people are are are recognizing what that means, and how you could sort of include it in your life. So I think, you know, there there is it there is no there's nothing special that I do. It's just what I do perhaps special is that, I have discovered what works for me and from that perspective, and how I can make it work even better for me and constantly optimize it. And I get excited about it because as you know, like, I I literally sometimes be you know, I wake up in the morning looking forward to do my next thing, the walk, the run, the hike, the cycle, the whatever. You know, because it is something that I value. And it took me you know, this is something that I worked on, obviously. I don't know, you know, for for people that are discovering, their their health journey at the moment, this may be a little harder. But for me, it comes a little, little bit more naturally. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, if you don't, even sleep enough, then, the body doesn't have the time to, actually get stronger and adapt to the new stimulus. Yes. So, yeah, it's a super critical component, of of the recovery. And I mean, I like the Sonos as well. They're, one of the best, like, recovery tools out there, and they also help with actually improving some of the VO2 max because, you're, you know, essentially just sitting in this box with, your heart rate being elevated a little bit higher than Yeah. If you were to be sitting or standing. So, yeah, it's a it's a small piece of cardio workout. 100%. I agree with you. And the nutrition. So that's also very critical. What is your views on nutrition? There's a lot of, different opinions about nutrition, but what and I in your personal thing that it's very individual, you know, there's a lot of differences in between people's metabolism and, requirements. So what kind of, nutrition has works for you? And and age. There's gender. There's age. There's, you know, where you are, geographic, what's available, you know, all of these different things, but also your your what what happens during the day. So if you're someone, you know, who works twelve hour twelve hours a day, you know, may not have access to to, you know, the the the food that is best for you, maybe it's a little harder. So, again, these these, content creators, influencers, etcetera, they always want you to, see think that they have the the hack for that, but it's obviously, you and I know it's it's it's not that simple. So for me personally, obviously, growing up in The Middle East, I've always had a Mediterranean diet. And, even before knowing that, you know, the the the scientific and medical world, recognizing as it recognizing it as one of the best diets around for the variety of things in it, and the spices and and as I said earlier, the olive oils and and, you know, the the the the variety of of nutrition, nutritional values. So that helped me too. So I had a good foundation. So we never, you know, ate at a McDonald as kids. We never it was it wasn't like that. It was always, an experience which also contributed to a better relationship with food. It's never like on the go. We would put a spread on the table, we would sit together, we would eat, and that made the food a lot more nutritional, in a in a, you know, maybe not in a scientific way, but it just it feels this way. So, for me, I focus quite a bit on, protein, of course, especially as, you know, a a 50 plus, man, and especially because I wanna maintain my muscle. But I also need my, complex carbs for my activity level and the amount of cardiovascular that I do and for my energy reserves. So I obviously, you know, have the the the the whole thing and my my fiber and all of that stuff. Right? But, to keep it simple for most people, what I say is that for me on my plate, I need to see colors. The more colors I see, the happier I am. And, I focus for I I prioritize protein in all of my meals. I have about four to five meals per day. They're not huge meals. So that works for me, for my, physical needs for me and the amount of activity that I do, but this doesn't mean that would work for anyone else, or for everyone else, I should say. So you need to be able to understand what is your BMI, understand what your body's, output, understand, how well recovered you are, understand what are your intolerances, for example, and, decide on what your priorities are and then focus on that. So I focus on on, brain healthy foods, muscle healthy foods, heart healthy foods, and stuff that will help with the gut. And naturally, in in our, where I come from, from the Lebanese cuisine, I don't know if you've had Lebanese food yet. I'm sure you have. So there are naturally, they pair, meals that work well together. So for example, we have a lentil meal that is, you know, vegetarian. So it's called mujaddara. And it's a it's a it's a dish that you can have for lunch, for dinner, etcetera. It's made predominantly from lentils and rice, and olive oil, basically. And it's mashed together. And it's always served with a cabbage salad. Now this pairing is not, you know, sort of, by chance or or haphazardly. So it was put together because the enzymes in the cabbage helps to break down the the the protein in the lentils. And that's what I love about our diet, our Mediterranean diets, specifically Lebanese, Syrians, Palestinian, etcetera, is that a lot of these dishes, the way they're put together, they put together with a lot of, sort of, wisdom of the ages, with a lot of wisdom from our parents, their parents, and their and their parents, and the parents before them. So, there's a lot of wisdom in the food and in the meals that were created. So I'm very fortunate to be part of that contributing to a better relationship with food, better understanding of of what is good for me, and a variety of of, nutritional sources. So I don't stress too much except with the fact that I, as I said, that I prioritize, protein and complex carbs for my particular lifestyle. Yeah. Yeah. It's very interesting that, you know, people from Lebanon, they or in other traditional cuisines, they don't know didn't know back in the day, you know, thousands of years ago that pairing the lentils with the cabbage would, you know, improve the protein breakdown. Like, they obviously didn't have no way to know that. Yep. But, it did actually, you know, turn out that way through, I guess, some form of, cultural selection. Yep. That over the course of time, people, intuitively figured it out that it pairs well and, it became like a tradition to combine those foods and, you know, applies I'm sure it applies a lot of other dishes out there as well in the world. Yeah. Why why certain foods are combined. 100%. I mean, we use okra. We use parsley as, like, a a whole salad. Other cuisines use it as a as a garnish. We have it in almost everything. So the way we approach our relationship with food is is a little more advanced than, perhaps other cuisines. So, that, you know, is is, is is something that I didn't have to work hard for. Mhmm. Mhmm. What about supplements? Are you a fan of supplements, and which ones are you taking? I am a fan of supplements, as far as, supplementing what is deficient. So for me, in the last five years or so, as I improved my relationship with my own health and body and understanding and using science, as we said earlier, I began to really understand, sort of my relationship with supplements. Before, it was more about, you know, the the more is better, and I quickly realized, within the last decade that, that is opposite to true. More is never better when it comes to supplements. It's precision that is better. And in order for you to do that, what I do is every three months, I have a blood test. I understand all my deficiencies. I then adjust what my index of supplements. If I can have it through diet, I would. If I cannot have it through diet for whatever reason, then I would supplement it with something else. So, at the moment, like, right this moment of time actually, three months ago, I did I did a blood test, and I realized that I needed, vitamin d. I needed vitamin e. I needed, more omega rich, foods, for example, and a few things like that. And I optimized that. So I focused on my supplements being that. I retested two weeks ago, and I didn't need any of that anymore. So now I have actually zero supplements. I take no supplements whatsoever. I am on a couple of peptides, but that's a a different process altogether. So, on supplements, at the moment, I'm on zero. I I'm not taking anything at all. I occasionally use, enzymes, digestive enzymes because of the amount of protein that I try to take per day. I wanna try to maximize, my my protein synthesis. And sometimes I would use enzymes to help me with that. But that's that's the approach to supplements, and it shouldn't be anything else. For most people, it's con it's convenience. They want, again, a shortcut. That's why a lot of these new brands are coming up with, like a a one sachet for all, you know, type, where bunch of supplements, everything that you possibly could need in one thing so you don't have to kind of, you know, find out which is what and whatever. And, yeah, I mean, as I said, it's a my my relationship with supplements has been kind of love hate, because I feel that a lot of it just turned it into expensive pee, unless you're understanding what your body is going through and what it needs. There are certain things that we know that, is difficult for us to receive such as vitamin d, for example, which is really not a vitamin, as you know. So, especially in this part of the world where we try to avoid the sun, maybe also from where you come from. I think you come from Estonia. Right? Yeah. I mean, there's not a lot of sun there. So Yeah. But, I think you can still avoid being deficient if, yeah, you supplement wisely or Yeah. You get, like, a ton of vitamin d during the summer. Right. Right. Exactly. So, just being aware of these things instead of just taking it just in case or multivitamins from whatever or, vitamin sources that are, maybe not the best, because we know it's a a unregulated industry. There's they they they make tons of money out of marketing more than anything else. The dosages are not nearly as accurate or or strong enough for most people if they're deficient in certain things and so on. So there's lots of complexities there. So selecting the right type of supplement is important, understanding if they're third party tested, yes or no, all of the stuff that we preach you and I preach about, when it comes to this sort of thing is very important. You can be super selective. And with that, sort of, discerning approach to supplements, you will actually feel much better than just taking a 120 different supplements, you know? So and that's something that I've proven to myself more than once. I, for example, you know, quite regularly take magnesium, for example, because I I I need it for my muscles, I need it for my sleep, I need it for my ligaments, and so on. But, only if I'm deficient. And that's really where everything changes. Yeah. So you mentioned earlier that, people in your center mostly are advanced individuals who are, you know, doing all the basics. They wanna optimize more. So maybe you can briefly say, okay. Because my my audience is also mostly, like, above, beginner level, so more advanced, but there's also some people who are more beginners. So what would you say, like, a next step for, people of, those, groups? So if someone is interested in starting to, you know, optimize their fitness and health from the beginning, what would you tell them and what would you tell for people who are already doing the basics kind of, and, they just want to get to the more advanced level? Yeah. So if you are someone who is right at the beginning of your journey, I always say to people is that truly introspect of are you really prioritizing this, or are you doing it because it's a hype and people around you are just doing it? There's a big difference to your approach. If you're doing it for yourself, or if you're doing it as, as for peer pressure or, you know, because it's cool or it's a hype or whatever, your approach will be very different. The moment you properly recognize that it is your priority, it becomes your priority, it will instinctively, just like everything else in life, when you prioritize your career, you're able to move ahead with that. When you prioritize your kids, you have a better relationship with them. When you prioritize your partnership, it comes better. When you prioritize your your health, you will instinctively do more better things for it. So for a complete beginner, I would say start there. Are you really up sort of prioritizing your health? Ask yourself that question. So and then once you, you know, true to yourself, have the right answer with that, you're able then to move forward. Because if you have not, if you can if you if you sacrifice things that could be health beneficial for other things in life, you're likely not gonna move very far in your in your journey in, into health span. For people that are doing the basics and needing to move to the next bit, I would say data is key. Not obsession with data, but a, an, an approach to understanding scientifically what is happening in your body. Right? Understand that there is balance in everything. More is never more. Balance is more. When you begin to understand where is the balance in your body when it comes to supplement, when it becomes when it comes to workout versus recovery, when it comes to your nervous system, triggers, when it becomes to the sources of stresses that are coming around you, be it from the environment, be it from paint, be it from the clothes that you wear, be it from, additives to food, to process, whatever, to mold and ACs, to, toxic relationships, even, you know, in your own mind with your own thoughts. You begin to build the balance, and with that data, you're then able to optimize. It is impossible, in my experience, to optimize without data. That's why, as I said, we when we've discussed quite a bit on our v o two max and things like that. So someone who's doing the basics, I would then now focus on, looking at your data in in a holistic way and see the triggers. I occasionally do, for example, CGMs to find out what is impacting my blood sugar and has anything changed, but I don't obsess with it. I do it once or twice a year. I wear wearables, but I don't look at them every day. I look at them maybe every two weeks, and I look back at the two weeks and say, okay. So how did I do am I trending up, trending down? That's it. So, you know, everyone, you know, be it be it the wearable companies or or, the the as I said, the content creators or whatever wants you to obsess with them, that's not that's not healthy. Life does not happen in those moments. It happens in between. And for someone a lot more advanced, then it becomes a lot more on nuances. And, again, being sincere and understanding your body and having a good relationship with it, and understanding that everything that you do in your life from where you sleep, to the air that you breathe, to the amount of time that you spend in nature, to the the type of exercise that you do, to how you, you know, you provide your nutrients to relationship with others, all of them to your mental health and all of that contribute to you becoming, I hate this word, but that like a superior in your health journey. You know? So, and and believe me when I say, you know, I say to everyone, you know, my guys, your guys, is that there are no, magic pills, like, once and for all. Like, you know, put that poster on your wall. There are no magic pills for true health journeys. And you're a testament to this, Sim, also. The amount of work that you put into your health is is, you know, second to none almost. Mhmm. Well, thank you. Yeah. Well, I do nail the fundamentals, but, yeah, I'm definitely not obsessing about about the basic or the small small things. Yeah. Agreed. Well, yeah, it's been great, to talk with you. And, before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and your work? Yeah. So, my my the the center is called Restore, Restore Fitness. We are in Jumeirah in Dubai. And, the my program is called limitlesshuman. It's limitlesshuman.ae as the website. And my socials, if you wanna connect with me, is ellie dot limitless sorry, ellie dot truth. I will send you this so you maybe you can include it in your in your descriptions or whatever. But I'll be happy to hear from anyone. If I could help, I will help. Sounds good. I'll put the links in the show notes. And my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or a habit that you wish you'd up to sooner? I wish I prioritized my, sort of relationship with myself a little bit more. I was sort of like a pendulum going from one side to the other between I am not good enough to, oh, I'm superior to others. I'm not good enough and superior to others, and which became a toxic relationship as far as I was concerned with myself. The ability I think one of the most powerful things that I've learned in the last decade, that I shout off rooftops, is having a better relationship with love. Love with humanity, love to other people, regardless of what's happening and judging less. Love perhaps is the most powerful thing. And and and, obviously, I don't mean love in a Hollywood sense. I mean, like, true human love to other other beings. That that has contributed to kind of almost like a, a a huge, upscale in everything that I do in my life. How my relationships are with my body, with my with the people that I love, with the, you know, those that love me, and that made the most important. Because at the end of the day, having a great health span but living miserably, you know, maybe it's not the greatest idea. So, I focus on that quite a bit right now. Yeah. That's a very good, advice. Well, it's been great to talk with you. And, yeah, thanks for coming. Of course. And thank you for having me, and I look forward to seeing you soon. Thank you.