People often say that eating too many carbs will spike your blood sugar and you're gonna get diabetes. I used the continuous glucose monitor for two weeks while eating over 300 grams of carbs every day to see what happens to my blood sugar in real time. Here's what my average blood sugar looked over those two weeks. It was on average 4.5 millimoles, which is 81 milligrams per deciliter. That's excellent and in the most optimal range possible. Yes. I am very healthy and physically active, which is why my body is able to use those carbohydrates for fuel. However, you don't have to be on a low carb diet to achieve optimal blood sugar levels. In fact, my blood sugar levels are better than they were when I was doing a low carb diet. Here's how to improve your blood sugar levels. Number one, have low visceral fat. Visceral fat is this fat around the organs that inhibits insulin production, hence resulting in higher blood sugar. You don't need to be on a low carb diet to lose visceral fat, but you do need to make sure that you're not overweight. My visceral fat is extremely low despite eating 300 grams of carbs because I'm very lean, and I also consume dietary polyphenols from green tea, olive oil, and different vegetables that target visceral fat. Aerobic exercise is also excellent for targeting visceral fat and improving blood sugar. Next, you should stop consuming alcohol because alcohol increases visceral fat gain even if you're not eating calories or if you're not overweight. Resistance training is key to increasing insulin sensitivity and glucose disposal because it depletes your muscle glycogen. Resistance training also activates a glucose transporter called GLUT4 that clears your bloodstream even without needing insulin. Managing your triglyceride levels is important to maintain insulin sensitivity. Eating high amounts of carbs and fats together is going to result in high triglyceride levels because your body can't burn the fats when there's high amounts of glucose in the blood. That's why if you eat higher amounts of carbs, you should eat less fat and vice versa. Follow for more.