Same with these supplements from one to 10, glycine. Well, for me, glycine is definitely 10. I think for some people, it might be an eight or seven because, some people can't tolerate glycine. They get, like, a nausea, but for me, it's definitely, 10 plus. NMN. NMN is a six. It's a bit over hyped, but it has a few benefits in terms of raising NAD status. Lutein. Lutein is nine, so it's a very powerful carotenoid and has been shown to improve our eyesight. Magnesium citrate? Magnesium citrate, I would say, is five. So it's one of the worst types of magnesium, but, it still helps with, raising magnesium status and might help with the constipation for some people, but generally, it's not the best form of magnesium. BCAAs? BCAAs I think is a two, so they don't help with muscle anabolism, they don't help with muscle growth or anything like that. They actually may encourage muscle breakdown if you take it in a faster state without other amino acids. The only thing that might help with is, they might support exercise performance if you take them during the exercise or they reduce muscle damage, muscle soreness after exercise, but they're pretty much worthless beside that. Probiotics? Most probiotics are two, they tend to be very generic and not very specific, so probiotics need to be more custom tailored to each individual, depending what kind of probiotics they might need. Calcium. Calcium, generic calcium supplements are three. They might be more harmful than good especially for people at a higher risk of heart disease and for bone density I would much rather use something like calcium alpha ketoglutarate rather than regular calcium. So yeah calcium regular is a three. Vitamin c? Vitamin c I would say six, so it's pretty safe. There's no real downside to even megadosing it, but it also doesn't do a lot so it might support collagen synthesis, right, you need a certain amount, but you don't need a ton of vitamin C, you can get it from whole food and the benefits for collagen synthesis and minor anti inflammatory effects you can already achieve with a very small dose. Garlic. Garlic, especially aged garlic extract, I would say is eight. So, it has a lot of evidence for lowering lipids, blood sugar, blood pressure, waist circumference and inflammation. The only downside is that it has blood thinning effects. So people who are taking blood thinners, need to be more careful but I think garlic is very underrated. It has a lot of evidence from clinical trials for metabolic health and, heart disease risk factors.