The USA spends three to four times more on health care than any other high income country, yet it has a life expectancy that's three to four years lower. Many people blame the high rates of obesity for that, but the truth is a lot more nuanced. First, life expectancy at birth is skewed by by many other statistics such as higher infant mortality, suicides, homicides, and traffic accidents. This is the real reason why The US has such a lower life expectancy. Deaths from physical assaults, including gun violence, are about seven times higher in The US than in other high income countries. Among Americans between the ages of one to 19, gun violence is the leading cause of death, surpassing even motor vehicle accidents. The US also has the highest rates of traffic deaths. In 2019, The US had eleven point fourteen deaths from from road injuries per 100,000 people, whereas in Germany, it was four point four, in The UK, three point nine, and in Canada, five point nine. The US has the highest rates of infant mortality out of all high income countries. Maternal mortality is also the highest in The US, and this number is rising. The US has had a massive opioid and drug overdose epidemic since the early two thousands. Over six times more people died from drug overdose in 2021 than in 1999. Obesity obviously plays a contributing role as The US has double the rates of obesity than other high income countries. Wealth inequality is also the biggest in The US among other high income countries, which affects the statistics. In 2021, the top 1% of households held 32.3% of the country's wealth, whereas the bottom 50% held only 2.6%. The wealthiest in The US are expected to live fourteen point six years longer than the poorest. A lot of people in The US don't have health insurance because of this reason. They just can't afford it. So as you can see, there are many things that contribute to the lower life expectancy in The United States. Yes. Being obese and eating a processed food diet does play a role, but statistically speaking, things like higher infant mortality, traffic accidents, and gun violence plays a bigger role. Follow for more.