No. You should see it now. Sorry. Yeah. Sorry. Like I said, it's, been a long time since I used the streaming software, so it's kind of new. Alright. Ashwagandha is in the a tier. Nanokinase, I'm also gonna put it in the A tier because of that reason, and I do think that it's pretty good. Okay now it's there, sorry. Next supplement, taurine. So this one has gotten got a lot of, let's say, positive press positive news recently over the last year. And it kind of started with this, mice study that showed, it extended lifespan in mice. And I do think that taurine has a quite a lot of, clinical evidence as well, mostly for metabolic syndrome. So there are quite a lot of studies that taurine supplementation improves metabolic syndrome in, like, quite larger doses, three to six grams per day, and it also has some exercise benefits in those quantities. So athletes tend to use taurines. I'm gonna put it in the s tier, which is the number one, tier. Yeah. That's better. Alright. Next up, hyaluronic acid. So this one can be useful for skin hydration, skin, antiaging. And the research about hyaluronic acid is mostly done on is on mostly based on, like, a view of these clinical trials that show that it helped with skin moisturization and hydration and, reduction in wrinkles. So it's not like a massive amount of studies, but you know I've used Hyaluronic Acid and I do think that it works great. Now there is some of these concerns about that it promotes cancer or something, but animal studies don't support that argument. So even in mice who have cancer, like aggressive cancer, hyaluronic acid didn't increase or promote their cancer any further. So it's kinda safe in that regard. So I wouldn't be, like, afraid of using hyaluronic acid because of, the fear of cancer because yeah, even in animal studies they don't find that effect. So it's like found to be safe in humans and it also found to support this skin hydration aspect, which I think, you know, depends here like how do you grade these tiers. Is it it's not gonna obviously extend your lifespan, hyaluronic acid, but it does have like the skin antiaging effects and it's relatively safe. So in that sense it could be in the s tier, but because, you know, it's kind of, you know, just one effect mostly that you see currently in the studies that I've seen, is that the skin hydration aspect, I would put it just into a tier, because of that reason. So it's not like super miraculous. It's not gonna extend your lifespan or anything like that. But, if your skin anti aging is your concern, then, yeah, that is a certainly a good supplement to take. Only hearing you in the left channel, nothing in the right. Is that correct? Should be from both or not? Let me see. Uh-huh. Like, It should be from both. Just here left. Okay. That's interesting. Well, it works from here. What about now? No. I guess we need to run with it right now. Yeah. Sorry about that. That. That's kind of the issue with live streams. Next up, vitamin c. So, I guess, vitamin c is generally, like, a very safe supplement. It does have some research, but, yeah, the problem is, again, it's not miraculous. And, yeah, like, large amounts of vitamin c aren't really provide shown to like provide any like, significant, let's say preventive effects against a lot of these chronic diseases. So yeah, if you're like sick or something, then you can use Vitamin C, but regular use of Vitamin C hasn't been found to really, like, reduce the risk of heart disease or something like that, and, metabolic syndrome, etcetera. So that's why, you know, yeah, it's kind of safe and it has some benefits mostly if you're, like, sick, but not a lot beyond that. Next, aspirin is kind of, not a supplement, obviously, but it has, like, a long track record of use for decades. And, when it comes to, like, cardiovascular disease, then they don't find it effective for primary prevention, which means that, it's not going to prevent the, development or the, like, the onset of heart disease. But, secondary prevention, it apparently is recommended by the American Heart Association. So it can have some benefits there. The problem is that if you are at a risk of like bleeding or something like that, then, it can be an issue because, yeah, aspirin can increase the risk of bleeding. So, you know, if you're gonna fall while taking aspirin, you might have worse outcomes. So it does have a risk. So that's why they don't recommend it for people who are at a risk of, bleeding. But, for secondary prevention in heart disease, that's what they do recommend it for. So I'm gonna put it in the c tier. There are, like, some minimal studies as well that it can extend actually, yeah, the ITP study, they did found that aspirin did extend, yeah, I wouldn't I wouldn't think that it's worthwhile to take a lot of aspirin all the time because of the risk of a bleeding for most people. Omega threes, you know, old but gold. Old but gold supplement. And, you know, omega threes, in my opinion, are the gold tier because there's so much data that higher omega three index is, associated with lower rates of heart disease, Alzheimer's, and all cause mortality. And, like, it's also like a biomarker that you can measure. So you don't know when it comes to taurine or nadokinase, you don't have a taurine biomarker, generally speaking. But you do have it with Omega threes, so that's why it's kind of a very great one to like, use in in terms of that. So you have a marker that you can track the effectiveness over time. And, yeah, just the idea of having a higher omega three index is something that we should generally, like, try to aspire towards. 8% is, kind of the sweet spot, 8% and above. Fisetin, so the senolytic, that helps with the clearing out the senescent cells. The problem with these senolytics is that you don't have a lot of human data yet. There are some animal studies, but these senolytics haven't been shown to, like, extend lifespan. So fisetin was one of the ones that failed in the ITP trials quite recently. I did find a study today, which I'm gonna actually talk about next week on the channel, where some of these analytics like quercetin and fisetin were found to lower epigenetic age, so lowers the biological age. But, you know, the the problem with these clocks is that they have some issues, when it comes to accuracy and and the confounding variables. So I would put fisetin into the C tier because of the lack of data currently and, it doesn't really extend lifespan in animals either. Quercetin, the same. I would put it it's it's just gonna not gonna be not gonna be worth it because of that same reason. Maybe in a few years we'll have more, like I say, studies on this senolytics. But, you know, the problem is that you don't necessarily want to inhibit all the senolytic cells either. Senolytic cells are or senescent cells are important for wound healing as well, for example. Calcium alpha ketoglutarate, so one popular longevity supplement that people use. And I guess the idea is that it's been found to lower biological age in humans in a clinical trial. But the issue is that the, you know, the company made their own study with their calcium alpha ketoglutarate, so you would need to take it with a bit of a grain of salt, the results. And, you know, they they are doing another study, not the same company, but another group of scientists are doing a study with calcium alpha ketoglutarate, which would probably come out in, like, next year or something. And, we'll see what the results say at that point. So I'm gonna put it currently in the c tier because of that reason. NMN, kinda same. I'll put it in a c tier because, you know, there are quite a lot of, human trials right now with NMN, but so far almost all of them have been quite, unimpressive. That, NMN specifically does, like, improve incident sensitivity apparently. They find that it increases, like, gate speed, etcetera, But, I wouldn't say that it's very convincing at the moment. NR, the same. I would put it in the C tier because of that reason. There are some clinical trials in humans and the biggest effect from NR is seen to be anti inflammatory effects. And both of them do raise NAD levels, you know, very dose specifically. So higher doses of NMN and NR both increase the, NAD levels in humans. But, you know, what do you do with that information? We don't necessarily know yet. Because, yeah, like NAD levels do appear to decline with age, not in all tissues, but, that's a general trend and not in all people. But yeah we don't know necessarily if NAD, like regeneration or increasing NAD would have any actual effects on the lifespan. Now Niacinamide is one of the NAD boosters that I do like and the reason is because it works through a different pathway. So Niacinamide goes through the NAD salvage pathway, which is different from the NMN and NR. So NMN and NR go directly to NAD, whereas Niacinamide supports the recycling pathway of NAD. And and, yeah, the recycling pathway is kind of the more important one for long term sustainable NAD production, which, many people underestimate. And, yeah. And niacinamide is effective in raising NAD levels. So it's, much cheaper than NMN and NR, but, it raises NAD equally as well. Regular Nasin, so this one, you know, does also raise NAD levels equally as good as niacinamide. The difference is Nasin causes the flush effect and it does increase HDL cholesterol levels, but increasing HDL levels with nacin Nasin specifically hasn't been seen to, like, reduce the rates of heart disease. So even if it does raise HDL levels, there's no effects on total heart disease, events and rates. So yeah. And that applies generally across the board for all HDL interventions. So, and the issue with niacin is that in large doses, it can have like liver, harmful effects on the liver. So I would still Yeah, I guess it's hard to say if it would be b or c, I would put it in the c as of now. Apigenin, so this one is a CD thirty eight inhibitor. It's like a herbal. You get it from parsley, so this, let's say, compound from herbs. And Apigenin has inhibitor effects on CD 38, which is, this enzyme that reduces NAD levels. So high CD 38 results in lower NAD levels, and CD 38 is like like a inflammatory glycoprotein that, yeah, mostly rises in response to inflammation. And, inflammation is one of the, like, biggest consumers of NAD as well. So ApoGenin can increase NAD through reduction of CD38. And it also has these anti inflammatory effects as a result of that. Or you know that's the reason it raises the NAD levels. So I would put it, I would still put it to C tier because there's not that much more data. So yeah, it can be great if your strategy is okay I need to raise my NAD levels. For example, you've tested your NAD levels, you see that your NAD levels are low. Then I would use niacinamide and apigenin, for example. That's like a great stack for for that. Garlic, so that can be aged garlic extract, that can be allicin, or whatnot. I would put that to so like, you know, there's a lot of clinical trials, meta analysis of clinical trials showing the garlic effect on blood pressure and, lipids and inflammation, and blood sugar, etc. So it just it's such a like a safe supplement. And it has quite a lot of results from clinical trials to show as well. So yeah. I think garlic is a great, like a supplement to use. Collagen, so again, you know, collagen has quite a lot of clinical trials, more so than Hyaluronic Acid for example. Anhediol also has effects on skin aging like Hyaluronic Acid. The issue is that, yeah, the collagen that kind of it's mostly limited you to the joint function, skin, and aging. And there are some studies that it has some, like, cardiovascular or it helps to modulate the cardiometabolic risk factors as well, like lipids and, inflammation, etcetera. So I would then put it into the s tier because of that. It's, very effective, especially for skin antiaging, and, it has like some additional benefits beyond hyaluronic acid. Whereas, you know, hyaluronic acid currently, I've only seen it has benefits on skin hydration and wrinkles, but collagen has more benefits than that. Alright. You can, yeah, put it in the chat if there are any issues. Inositiol, so this is kind of a sugar molecule that has great effects on blood sugar regulation and exercise performance even, and sleep as well. So I like Inositol. I think it's a very great, let's say, supplement as a sugar sweetener, a sugar substitute. It doesn't have, like, any actual sugar in it, but it just tastes sweet like lysine, and it has benefits. I would put it in the A tier, mostly because there's not a ton of, like, you know, clinical trials on inositol at the moment. But it's certainly the one I would regularly use for sleep and, blood sugar management, for example. And glycine let's guess where I'm gonna put the glycine. Now glycine is something that doesn't have, like, a ton of clinical trials, either for, let's say, the outcomes of interest, like cardiometabolic risk factors or sleep even or something like that, but it has, like, something of, each of those conditions. Like, it has been seen to improve sleep in humans. It has been seen to, like, affect inflammation, and other, like, blood markers in a positive way. It obviously is a part of collagen, so it supports collagen synthesis. And, when it comes to, like, animal studies, then there is, yeah, quite a lot of studies about glycine extending, an animal lifespan, mostly through mimicking this methionine restriction. And, yeah. One of the interesting like, one of the biggest things that I have actually seen from taking glycine is, the reduction in the visceral fat. So as you recall from, I guess it was two months ago or something, when I did the visceral fat video of how I reduced my visceral fat. And, one of the biggest things that I did change was increasing my glycine intake a lot and reducing my methionine intake. Now I do think that the reduction in methionine had a bigger role to play in reducing visceral fat than increasing the glycine, but low glycine levels are seem to be associated with higher visceral fat in humans. So, yeah. Start glycine maxing if, you want to improve visceral fat, for example. But I like I said, I think the reduction in methionine has a bigger role to play in this, area. But I'm gonna put glycine to S tier. Like I said, I'm kind of this is my list. For me, glycine is S tier. Forever S tier, you know, you can put it in the number one spot here as well. Yeah. For collagen synthesis, for visceral fat, for sleep, for GABA, so it can make you more relaxed. So like I said, some people might react bad to glycine that, they might get some hypoglycemia or headaches or something. Well in that case, you might need to like take a lower dose or and take it with food to avoid the hypoglycemia response. Spirulina, so algae supplement. With these algae supplements, they're a good source of spermidine, dietary spermidine, and, some other kind of, compounds as well. And, you know, dietary spermidine is associated with lower rates of mortality. Now, I don't know if it's like causal because healthy healthy foods generally have more spermidine like mushrooms, cheese, vegetables, those kind of things. They have a lot of spermidine. So, but spirulina also has one of the highest dietary spermidine out there. I don't take spirulina myself, but I would put it like in the b tier in my opinion. Methylene blue is a popular supplement or not a massively popular, but, it has, like, a niche niche of people that do use it. And I did make a video about methylene blue last year as well. And, it does appear to have effects on skin antiaging. So, it, can have, like, an like, inhibits senescent cells, anti inflammatory effects. So but yeah. Like, there's no massive amounts of human trials with it, obviously. It is, like, on the World Health Organization's list of essential medicines, if I'm not mistaken. And, it they do use it for for certain medical conditions at the hospital. But, I'm not really convinced that I would start maxing methylene blue at the moment. So I'm gonna currently put it into the b tier. It probably has effects on skin anti aging, but there's no clinical trials to confirm it, yet. Multivitamin. So now this is like very context dependent. Like, which multivitamin are we talking about and what does that multivitamin have? Because, you know, multivitamins is such an umbrella term that, you know, you could you could almost categorize anything in here. And, all these multivitamins have different ratios of, different vitamins and minerals. And it's hard to say, okay, what is the gold standard? Now when it comes to the studies then there are, yeah, like this few clinical trials on elderly people that multivitamin use is associated with better cognition, in their later years. But, there's other more longitudinal studies that find that multivitamin use has almost like no significant effect. So I personally am not taking the multivitamin. I have a pretty good diet. I'm getting plenty of nutrients from my diet. So I don't think it's, necessary to kind of have this insurance policy for your micronutrients, in the form of a multivitamin. But again, it depends a lot on the type of a multivitamin. Now, there might be some multivitamins that are good. Most of them are probably not good. So I'm gonna put it into the d tier right now because, Yeah. It's just hard to say which multivitamin are we talking about. Creatine. Creatine obviously is the OG of sports supplements and probably has the most studies out of all these supplements here. So I'm gonna put creatine in the s tier. It has, you know, decades of research about, sports performance, muscle growth, speed, power, and those kind of things. And, like I said in my one of my recent videos that it also has a lot of brain benefits. So I would use creatine for, let's say cognitive health as well and and cognitive, anti aging, if that's if that makes sense. Melatonin, another s tier supplement for me. So, you know, you know, I'm a huge fan of melatonin, not because of the sleep benefits. You know, I would I would be fine if melatonin had no benefits on sleep. But I have no issues with sleep, but, the reason I like melatonin is because of these, anti inflammatory antioxidant effects. So melatonin is very powerful antioxidant. It actually regulates glutathione production, which is considered to be the master antioxidant. But, because melatonin is, like, let's say, at a higher hierarchy of antioxidants, then I would say that melatonin should be called, like, the master antioxidant. And melatonin levels go down with age, quite a lot. Almost like, tenfold compared to your teenage years. And, yeah. I think that's an issue. So, yeah. Melatonin supplementation is in the S tier in my opinion. Magnesium as well. S tier supplement. So like, almost everyone should or or would benefit from taking some magnesium. Very, safe unless you have some kidney issues and, yeah. It's hard to get from food in a lot of the cases. And a lot of the food has lost a lot of the magnesium as well because of soil erosion etcetera. Vitamin d three. So vitamin d three obviously can be useful if you have low vitamin d levels. There doesn't appear to be any like preventive effects on, you know, these chronic diseases if you have, let's say, normal vitamin d levels. But low vitamin d levels themselves are associated with obviously higher mortality, higher cardiovascular disease, etcetera. Of course, getting it from the sunlight is better than from a supplement. You get a lot of the other benefits from the sunlight that you don't get from the supplement such as this infrared radiation, circadian rhythm alignment, etcetera. So, yeah. The supplement alone, just a vitamin d three supplement alone is not that great. It can raise your vitamin d levels, which we don't necessarily know if it is going to be better in the absence of the sunlight, the infrared radiation. So I'm gonna put it into the c tier because of that reason. Vitamin k two. So usually if you take vitamin d three, they recommend to take k two as well. So support coagulation and, like, I guess, directing calcium into the bone. At k two, I would put in the a tier. There are some clinical trials on k two supplementation that they do reduce plaque scores in people who have higher calcium scores. And dietary k two intake is also associated with lower rates of heart disease and lower old cause mortality. So that's why I'm gonna put it in the can I make the camera smaller? Alright. It's gonna go like this. Yeah. So dietary k two intake is associated with lower heart rate, sorry, lower heart disease rates and lower all cause mortality. Right. DHEA, This one is a hormone and, I don't think that you should take DHEA. Just, because of no reason. I do think that, people who have low DHE levels appear to or it can be good to increase DHEA DHEA levels. Because low DHEA levels are also associated with high mortality, high rates of heart disease, and with age you do see a decline in DHEA levels. Now my DHEA levels are fine. I'm not taking DHEA, but if I was if I was gonna be like, you know, 60 years old with low DHEA levels, then I would consider taking that. And there are some studies on DHEA as well, which makes it more appealing, but I'm gonna put it in the b tier at the moment. So So there's no, like, additional, like, life extension effects that I know of. Lithium orotate, you know, this mineral is usually used, for, like, a bipolar disorder, but a lot of like, I guess biohackers and health enthusiasts have also started to use microdose lithium orotate one milligram a day to support mood. Plus, there might be some, let's say, benefits on brain aging, which, like higher lithium, higher lithium levels in the drinking water are associated with lower rates of like suicide and lower rates of homicide even. But, is it worthwhile to take it as a supplement? Because of that reason, you know, depends a lot on your Ariane, whether or not you're getting enough lithium. So people take, like, a microdose of lithium as a preventive measure. I'm not doing it myself. So I would put it in the c tier as of now. Cert six. So this supplement, this one, you know, Cert six is the only Sertuin that has been found to extend lifespan in animals. The other Sertuins haven't been found to do that. So Sert6 theoretically would be the most, let's say, the best longevity or two in, but, the issue is, yeah, that that there's almost like no other research about it, as of now. So that's why I'm gonna put it in the c tier because of that reason. CoQ10. So, CoQ10 appears to have benefits on fatigue and they say it helps with her like, cardiovascular health, but the evidence for that is like limited, but that it would actually have any effects in preventing heart disease or something like that. So CoQ10, I'm gonna put into C tier because of the limited evidence. NAC. So there's quite a lot of these studies with Glycine and NAC, that they help with a lot of these hallmarks of aging in elderly people. Like inflammation, gait speed, grip strength, body composition, waist circumference and those kind of things. And NAC generally is also like very safe. It increases glutathione. I'm gonna put it in the S tier because of that reason. Berberine. So I like berberine. I think it's, great. A lot of people call it like nature's metformin, which, you know, it does reduce blood sugar levels, but it's not nearly as effective as metformin, for blood sugar regulation. Berberine is much better at lowering lipids, like cholesterol, than, it is for lowering blood sugar. And it does help with weight loss as well, so reducing the waist circumference in human clinical trials. And there was also, yeah, like this stories about Berberine being nature's Ozempic because of their weight loss trials. But I it's again, it's not as effective as Ozempic. It's not as effective as Metformin, but it does have those effects. So if it does lower blood sugar, it does lower lipids, it does lower waist circumference, and, because of that reason, I'm gonna put it in the a tier. The issue is with Berberine is that it, it probably reduces your VH max similar to metformin, and, it probably has inhibitory effects on muscle growth if you take it chronically. So that's why it's not in the s tier. Next, Metformin. So again, like I said, Metformin has, you know, effects on lowering blood sugar and it is for diabetics, life saving. You know, diabetics who take Metformin live longer than those who don't. And there was this kind of idea that Metformin, even in non diabetics, is going to extend their lifespan. But, yeah those studies weren't properly controlled for and, they don't. So if you don't have diabetes, you're not gonna live longer by taking Metformin, at least based on the current evidence. But it does certainly have a lot of benefits for diabetics. In animals, Metformin doesn't extend lifespan either. Although there was this recent study that I'm gonna make a video about next week that Metformin interventions did result in lower biological ages, age course. So, you know, what what does that mean? And what does a lower biological age score mean? Depends a lot on who you ask and, what what kind of a clock did they use to measure that biological age. So, yeah, there's not a lot of, animal studies even to suggest that Metformin would have, like, longevity benefits. But it again, it's very beneficial for diabetics. So I'm gonna put it in the d tier because, it does reduce v r two max. It does, potentially result in lower muscle growth as well, in humans. So, for otherwise healthy people, it's not really worth it. Unless you have high blood sugar levels or if you're trying to keep your blood sugar levels super low for some reason. Rapamycin, you know, this is the goat this is the the goat life extension molecule. It's, shown the most impressive life extension in animal studies. Of course, there's no human studies for longevity right now. But my opinion about rapamycin has changed over the, you know, last two years or something. In the beginning, I might have had, more worries about Repomycin that it would, like, result in lower muscle growth or that it has some negative effects. But, or that it would, like, weaken your immune system because it is used in organ transportation, in, to prevent organ rejection. So it suppresses your immune system if you take it during, organ transportation. But, if you use it, like, acutely, like, once a week or something like that, then it doesn't apparently suppress your immune system. And, the studies on elderly people who take Rapamycin have found that it actually enhances immune system function. So, yeah. That has kind of changed my opinion about Rapamycin a little bit and it potentially doesn't even result in lower muscle growth either. So there's this kind of weird dichotomy with mTOR and muscle growth, which, yeah, I haven't found the complete answer to yet from from like the studies that, chronic mTOR suppression apparently does result in like lower muscle muscle growth, but acute mTOR suppression might even preserve muscle better than chronic activation of mTOR. So that's why, you know, I I I can't put rapamycin to the s tier because it doesn't have that much, clinical trials in humans, and I'm not taking rapamycin myself at the moment. But I do think that it probably will, you know, it it has been certainly shown to extend animal lifespan repeatedly. And in humans it appears to have benefits on the immune system in elderly people. Now is it going to extend human life spell? I don't know. You know, we will see in a few years when more studies come out, you know, I could put it in the D tier because of that reason, because of the uncertainty, but I will put it into b tier right now. Because, I think the potential is there. We just need more studies in the next few years. So yeah. It it certainly has the biggest potential for becoming the first world's first geoprotective, drug that it would be used to, slow down aging in humans. But, yeah, it's too early to say. Next up, Resveratrol. So, this is another one of those popular longevity supplements that doesn't really hold up the hype, in my opinion. I'm gonna put it in a D tier. So it's kinda similar to metormin that it has negative effects on fitness. It can lower VO two max, and it also lowers testosterone levels in men or androgens. And the, like, life extension effects in animals aren't that great either. Most of the studies have have been seen to be, like, debunked or not, accurate. And that there was, like, one study where resveratrol d extend lifespan in mice, but those mice were, like, severely obese. So it's not life extension, it's just living longer with obesity. If that makes sense. So but there are, like, again but, you know, that actually in human trials, resveratrol does improve, like, lipids and blood sugar. So, yeah. If you have obesity or diabetes, then resveratrol can be great. But it's not, again, like, beneficial for otherwise healthy people in my opinion. Yeah. Curcumin. So, research about curcumin mostly the most impressive results about curcumin, is is the anti inflammatory effects. So there's a quite a lot of clinical trials with curcumin showing anti inflammatory effects, so lowering inflammation and CRP. I'm gonna put it in the a tier because of that. Yeah. Glucosamine sulfate. So this, can be useful for joints. Also has anti inflammatory effects. You know, from the observational data, you can find that Glucosamine supplementation is associated with lower rates of heart disease and lower all cause mortality. But, you know, the problem with that is that if you take Glucosamine then you're probably like a healthier person or you you pay attention to your health more by taking glucosamine. So, it's hard to say if there's like any causal link there. But generally, glucosamine has benefits on the joints in clinical trials as well. So I'll put it in if you put it in the a tier, it's like, you know, just general anti inflammatory. It's certainly better than vitamin c or like, spirulina, in my opinion. Actually, we maybe put Niacinamide here, but, because there's not a lot of, let's say, outcome studies with Niacinamide. Like, I would put it here because it does raise NAD levels, but there's not a lot of other, like, outcome studies in my opinion. And lastly, TMG, so trimethylglycine. This supplement, you know, has benefits on methylation, homocysteine levels, which worked great for me, lowered my homocysteine levels, and it has exercise performance benefits as well. So I'm gonna put I'm a new fan of TMG because of my own, let's say, blood blood markers that improved with TMG. I didn't notice any fitness or exercise benefits from TMG, but, yeah. I'm gonna put it in the SDR right now. So this is the list at the moment. You know, you probably have a few more supplements that you want to add. So I'm gonna, like, answer a few of the supplements that I might have missed. So if you have any questions, okay, what supplement should belong where? But keep in mind, this is again my personal list with my own personal biases. Azteaxanthin, that's a good one. I forgot about that. Azteaxanthin, you know, I'm a big fan of Astaxanthin. I think, you know, for me, it's in the s tier, but I'm gonna put it in the a tier because, it it has anti inflammatory effects, and it can lower blood pressure, but mostly in people who have high blood pressure or high inflammation. So it's probably not gonna have like additional anti inflammatory effects or, like, this blood pressure blood pressure lowering effects in, otherwise in healthy people. But it does have, skin benefits protecting the skin against UV radiation. So I'm gonna put it in the a tier, but I you know, it can also be considered in the s tier in my personal list. I take Azaxanthin every day myself. Lutein lutein. So this carotenoid, good for the eyes and brain. So the thing with lutein is that, yes, dietary lutein intake is associated with lower risk of macular degeneration and, lower risk of lower rates of neurodegeneration as well. But, you know, it's dietary lutein mostly. I'm gonna put it in the b tier currently. I do think that taking some lutein every day can be useful for eye health, as, like, insurance policy, but we probably need more data about that. It's certainly not harmful in my opinion. What next? Bread, yeast, rice. So this supplement, mostly used for, lipids, so lower in cholesterol. And, yes. There is clinical trials showing that effect. The issue is red rice is that it can also is because the herbal supplement herbal supplements tend to have some negative effects on the liver. So it can elevate liver enzymes, especially if it's like, not a not a clean source of the herb. So I'm gonna put it in the B tier. Similar to lutein. It's it's not, again, it's not gonna be as effective as like statins or something for lowering cholesterol. So but but it does do so a small a little bit. BPC one fifty seven. So peptide, you know, BPC one fifty seven probably has no life extension effects. I'm pretty sure of that. And, the, you know, the issue with BPC is that, yes, it can have, like, regeneration regenerative effects on, like, tendon health or tendon integrity and joint like, injuries, but, you know, it's after the fact of an injury. If you don't have an injury, then you probably aren't gonna see any benefits from PBC one fifty seven. But PBC, you know, has general anti inflammatory effects as well, systemic anti inflammatory effects. It might have gut health effects based on animal studies. It might have, brain health effects as well. So I would limit it because of the limited research, I'll put BBC in the c tier because it's not gonna it's not gonna have life extension effects. Yeah, like I said, I'm pretty sure of that. But it's very useful. If it's if you have an injury, then BPC might be an s tier. Back yeah, like I said, if you don't have an injury, then, it's not gonna have a lot of effects. What's next? Tongkat Ali. So Tongkat Ali, it's going to increase testosterone if your testosterone is, let's say, medium to low, if you have very high testosterone then it's probably not gonna do it. Although I might be wrong. I haven't taken Tongkat Ali for like longer periods of time, but in some studies it does appear to work. I'm gonna put it and again, depends what your goal is. If your goal is testosterone maxing, then it can be for sure in the stack to use based on the yeah, in my opinion, it will be in the b tier or a tier, somewhere between there. We can put it in the a tier. What's next? Pterostilbene. So this one is a kinda cousin molecule to resveratrol. It belongs in the d tier. It has even less studies than resveratrol. So, yeah, not I don't think it is very effective. Theanine. So theanine improves sleep in humans, can have, like, anxiolytic effects. You know, it's s tier because it's, like, safe. It has probably most people will have some effect from taking theanine, But, the effect size I would say or the kind of outcome, it's probably not it's it's not gonna reduce your, like, I don't know, heart disease risk. Unless it improves your sleep and unless it, like, lowers your stress. So that depends a lot on the person who is taking it. I'm gonna put it in the a tier because it's pretty effective and safe and, like, multiple multiple benefits. What next? Carnosine. So carnosine, the biggest effect is this, protection against advanced glycation and products, which, develop from high temperature cooking, especially proteins and fats. So, I think the issue with carnosine is that it's not very bioavailable as I am as I've seen. Beta Alanine is the one that actually creates carnosine in your body. So beta Alanine is better than carnosine itself, But beta alanine also gives you the itch. It makes you itchy. So carnosine alone probably is in the b tier. Glycine also has anti advanced glycation end product effects. So glycine is, I think, better than carnosine for protecting against the advanced glycation end products, and it's also cheaper, and glycine has other benefits. So beta alanine beta alanine is the one that converts to carnosine in the body or makes carnosine. So that could be better, like a tier. And the beta alanine also lowers cholesterol levels. So it, makes carnosine that reduces adenine application and products and also lowers cholesterol, and it has some exercise performance benefits as well. Carnitine, so oral carnitine is not bioavailable, So it doesn't have any almost effects on fat metabolism or something like that. And the problem with carnitine supplements is that it can convert to TMAO, which is considered like a risk factor for heart disease and kidney disease. But it's more so probably based on the research that people who have kidney disease or heart disease have high TMAO levels. So TMAO itself probably has less of a causal effect on heart disease. But, regardless, oral carnitine is not bioavailable. You would need to inject carnitine for it to have effects for, like usually, people take it for, like, exercise and fat fat metabolism. So you would need to inject it. I haven't injected any carnitine myself or anything, so I don't know if it works. So there's very little research about injectable carnitine as well. Zaxanthin. So it's the exantin is the same as, like, lutein, you know, higher zaxanthin intake associated with lower rates of macular degeneration, neurodegeneration as well, but, the supplemental form is not that studied. Glutathione. So I'm a bigger fan of taking glycine and n a c to increase glutathione. So glutathione supplements alone, they can, I guess, it's better to take the precursors for for glulathon than This is interesting? I'm getting a fire alarm in my apartment building right now, so I'm probably gonna have to cut the stream short. So, yeah. Gla'Than, I would put it in the B tier. So, that's not as effective as glycine and n a c. But, yeah. I'm sorry about that. I'm having a fire alarm in the apartment building, so I'm gonna have to go, which tends to happen every once in a while in this building. But, yeah, I mean, thanks for watching. This is the list. This is my supplement tier list. I wasn't gonna make a full video about it, but, short livestream in celebration of the 200 k subscriber, subscriber, I think is worthwhile. And, yeah, thanks for watching. Thanks for subscribing. 200 k. I'm gonna be going more towards higher subscribers and growing. So, yeah, I'll see you around, and, thanks for watching.