Relying solely on data from published studies is a sub-optimal strategy for optimal health. To illustrate what I mean by that, let's have a look at red blood cells. In particular, the reference range as defined by LabCorp, which is 4.14 to 5.8 million red blood cells per microliter of blood.

So, with the goal of optimizing health and longevity, should red blood cells be low, mid-range or high? Let's have a look at how red blood cells change during aging to try to answer that question.

So starting in youth, we can see that the data for men in green and for women in blue, that red blood cells decline during aging for both men and women. So starting with the data for men, we can see that clear decline with the green line. And then for women, the data is a little bit more variable with a decline in red blood cells, and then an increase up until about 55 years old, after which red blood cells consistently decline up until 95 years old.

So when considering these data, this suggests that having relatively higher levels of red blood cells is youthful.

So with that in mind, is the higher end of the reference range for red blood cells optimal for health and longevity? So to try to answer that question, let's have a look at my own red blood cell data since 2008. And I've blood tested 36 times over that timespan, so the last 13 years. And from 2008 to 2013, I was measuring about once a year, so annually at my yearly physical, and I wasn't tracking my diet at all. And my average red blood cell level during those six measurements was 4.96. So when going back to the data on the left, we can see that I'm higher than the green line, which based on having relatively higher levels of red blood cells in youth, one would expect that that should be okay, or good.

And then in 2015, I started tracking my diet including weighing all my food, entering that data into Chronometer, and then putting all that data into an Excel file, so I could start to look at correlations between my diet with these biomarkers. And during that four-year span from 2015 to 2019, I blood tested 17 times. And my average red blood cell level during those 17 tests was 4.62.

So then when going back to the curve on the left, or actually before we go back to the curve, so note that these two groups of data, from 2008 to 2013 versus the 17 blood tests from 2015 to 2019, are significantly different when using a two-sample t-test. So now going over to the curve back on the left, now we can see I'm on the aging curve, which is bad news. I'm not trying to be I have red blood cell levels that are characteristic of my chronological age, I want to have red blood cell levels that are characteristic of youth, and to keep them there for as long as I can.

So because I tracked my diet, I can make interventions, changing various things in my diet to try to improve these biomarkers. And I had success with that as we can see over the last 13 measurements from later in 2019 to my last blood test in November of 2021, we can see that my average red blood cell count is 5.1.

So now going back to the curve on the left, we can see that I'm back higher than the curve, and when compared with my data from 2008 to 2013, the recent data, 5.1, is actually significantly higher when compared with the 4.96 from my first six six measurements. And also note that from the 2015 to 2019 data, those 17 blood tests, when compared with my last 13 blood tests, I was able to significantly increase those red blood cells when using a two-sample t-test.

So the assumption is that having relatively higher red blood cells is optimal, as they decline during aging. But is that true? Is my 5.1 value for red blood cells too high?

So to help answer that question, evaluating correlations for red blood cells with other systemic biomarkers can help discern what's optimal. So what are these systemic biomarkers? Which I've referred to in recent videos as these "big picture" biomarkers. And that's what's shown here. There are 23 of them, usually there are 24 including red blood cells, and then you can't correlate them with themselves. So I'm going to run through this real quick as I've presented this data in other videos. What do these big picture biomarkers include? They include glucose and homocysteine, and then three markers of kidney function, four markers of liver function, all the major lipoprotein, all the major immune cells and platelets, red blood cell related metrics like the mean corpuscular volume, so the average volume in a red blood cell, red blood cell distribution width, a marker of inflammation, high sensitivity C-reactive protein, and then the overall biological age score as indicated by Morgan Levine's PhenoAge and the aging.AI.

So also note that the little N next to each biomarker is how many blood tests that I have for each each biomarker. And then R is the correlation coefficient, and then P value is the measure for evaluating statistical significance, which in this case is P value less than 0.05.

So when comparing correlations for red blood cells with all these biomarkers, 11 of them have a P value less than 0.05, so 11 significant correlations. So then the next question becomes, are these significant correlations going in the right or wrong direction in terms of aging and all cause mortality risks. And then that approach can help to identify what red blood cell amount may be optimal for me, rather than relying solely on the published studies and the reference range.

Now, there are three scenarios that are possible here. So if red blood cells are significantly correlated with more biomarkers going in the right direction then wrong, this would suggest that red blood cells higher than my 13-year average, 4.85, maybe optimal. Conversely, if red blood cells are significantly correlated with more biomarkers going in the wrong direction then right, this would suggest that red blood cell levels lower than my 13-year average may be optimal. And last, if red blood cells are significantly correlated with the same amount of biomarkers going in the right direction than wrong, this would suggest that my average, my 13-year average red blood cell value, may be optimal. So let's see how that goes.

So let's start at the top of the list with glucose. And this should be relatively straightforward. And I'm going to try to go through each of these relatively quickly as I've presented this data in other videos.

So glucose levels increase during aging, as shown here. And I'm only going to focus on the data for men as that specifically applies to me. So as you can see, by the black line, glucose levels increase during aging. And then in terms of all cause mortality risk, as shown here on the right, relatively higher levels of glucose are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk.

So when considering that red blood cells are correlated with higher glucose, that's a significant correlation in my data. That black arrow can be changed to a red arrow, indicating going in the wrong direction.

All right, so next up on the list is blood urea nitrogen, BUN. So blood urea nitrogen increases during aging, as shown here by the blue line. And relatively higher levels of blood urea nitrogen are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk, and I presented this data in my last video, so if you missed that, check it out.

So when considering those data and the positive correlation for red blood cells being significantly correlated with higher blood urea nitrogen, this is also going in the wrong direction. So we'll put another red arrow there.

All right, so next on the list is albumin. So albumin levels, for men and women, decline during aging. They're relatively higher in youth and then relatively lower percentages in advanced age. And then in terms of all cause mortality risk, we're looking at data here on the right for 85 to 99-year-olds, 100 to 104-year-olds, and older than 105. And the HR is the hazard ratio for all cause mortality. The 95% confidence interval gives you the range where the risk values are present. And what we can see is that for relatively higher levels of albumin, significantly lower all cause mortality risk was identified for each of these three age groups. And also, interestingly, and then for the other biomarkers on this list, albumin is the only one where the magnitude of the all cause mortality risk reduction is greatest for albumin when compared with these other biomarkers.

So when considering the data for albumin, and when considering that higher red blood cells are correlated with higher albumin, which is going in the right direction. So we can then change that arrow to now a green arrow. So we've got one going in the right direction for the correlation for red blood cells with albumin.

I'm going to skip past the AST and ALT and LDL for now. We'll come back to that in a second. Uh, so what about neutrophils? Higher red blood cells are correlated with higher neutrophils is that going in the right direction or wrong?

Neutrophils increase during aging, so the blue line is the data for men, and we can see that there. They increase, uh, during aging. And in terms of all cause mortality risk, so this is the reference, which was 2 to 3,000 neutrophils per microliter of blood, which is where most of my data usually lies. We can see that higher levels of neutrophils going from, uh, 3,000 past 7,000 neutrophils per microliter is associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So we don't want to have more neutrophils, uh, that as they increase during aging and are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk.

So when considering its correlation with red blood cells, higher red blood cells are correlated with higher neutrophils, that also is going in the wrong direction. So another red arrow.

All right, so monocytes, heavy, similar story. Monocytes increase during aging, and then in terms of all cause mortality risk, we can see that higher monocytes are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk, as shown here. So this too is going in the wrong direction. So another red arrow.

What about the percentage of lymphocytes? So here in this case, we have a negative correlation, which means higher red blood cells are correlated with a lower percentage of lymphocytes.

So lymphocyte percentage declines during aging, which is shown here. So in youth, there's a relatively higher lymphocyte percentage and then relatively lower lymphocyte percentages in advanced age. And then in terms of all cause mortality risk, there isn't any all cause mortality data. I've yet to come across a study that looked at the percentage of lymphocytes and its association with all cause mortality risks. So if anybody's come across that data, please leave a comment and and share.

So when considering that lymphocyte percentage declines during aging, this two is going in the wrong direction, as higher red blood cells are correlated with lower lymphocyte percentage. So another red arrow.

In my last video, using a similar analysis of biomarkers versus biomarkers, I presented, uh, these correlations for platelets, showing that having relatively higher platelets within my 200 to 300 range is correlated with more biomarkers going in the wrong direction then right. So I don't want to have relatively higher levels of platelets based on that data.

So when considering that higher red blood cells are correlated with higher platelets, that's a negative correlation. So higher red blood cells are correlated with higher platelets. So that's going in the right direction. So we've got one going in the right direction for the correlation for red blood cells with platelets.

I'm going to skip past the AST and ALT and LDL for now. We'll come back to that in a second. Uh, so what about MCV and then AST and ALT? So MCV is the mean corpuscular volume. So red blood cell levels are correlated with MCV. And I have a negative correlation there, meaning higher red blood cells are correlated with lower MCV. So MCV declines during aging. So from youth, the MCV is higher, and then declines as we age. So with that, we can say that higher red blood cells are correlated with lower MCV, which is going in the right direction.

And then AST and ALT, higher red blood cells are correlated with higher AST and ALT. And AST and ALT are liver markers. Liver function tends to decline over time as we age. So, higher red blood cells correlated with higher AST and ALT means it's going in the wrong direction. So two red arrows.

So, based on the biomarkers that are significantly correlated with red blood cells, seven of the 11 biomarkers are going in the wrong direction.

So, if you remember the scenario, the three scenarios, this suggests that red blood cells towards the high end of my range, 5.1, may not be optimal.

Now, going forward, I'll modify my diet, and what exactly that I'll modify is will be the topic of a future video. And I can't say when because I need to collect more data and, uh, get the data there first before presenting how I did it. But going forward, I'll modify my diet with the goal of reducing my red blood cells from their current about 5.1 average to within the 4.6 to 4.85 range, so a little bit below my average over the past 13 years.

Now, based on the aging data for red blood cells, I could have assumed that my recent red blood cell data was optimal and I would have missed that the biomarker versus biomarker approach suggests that they're too high.

And I expect that this approach can provide greater specificity for what's optimal for blood biomarkers rather than solely relying on published studies and the reference range.

All right, if you have questions and comments, uh, I'm going to do something different on this channel and, uh, let's have an ask me anything, AMA. So tomorrow, at 12:00 PM, Sunday, December 12th, 2021, if you're interested, uh, come to my channel and, uh, let's run through all this and any other questions that, uh, you might have.

If you're interested more about my attempts to biohack aging, come join us on Patreon.

Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.