Is there an additive effect of nicotinamide mononucleotide, NMN supplementation on exercise performance? That's what a study published last week sought to figure out. And as we can see by the title, NMN did improve aerobic capacity in runners. Uh so, first, what was the study population? Uh, well, it included 27 to 50-year-olds, uh they had an average age of 36 years, BMI was in the normal range, so uh 22, which is relatively lean. And then there were 48 subjects, mostly men, 40 men, 8 women. And then this was equally divided into four groups. So, 10 men and two women in each of four groups. So, what were the four groups? A control group that was given uh cranberry powder and a sugar, maltodextrin. And then three different doses of NMN, low dose, medium dose and high dose. And those doses were 300 mg, 600 mg, and 1,200 mg per day for the three different groups. Now, all all groups, all four groups performed six weeks of aerobic exercise training, and that was performed 5 to 6 days per week, including 3 to 4 days per week for running and 2 days per week for biking. And exercise was performed for 40 to 60 minutes per session. Now, if you notice in the title, it says that they included amateur runners, but that really doesn't tell us if these are average runners, uh runners that had uh elite aerobic capacity to start with. Uh, so what what can we see or what what what was the fitness level of the amateur runners? And we can see uh that their resting heart rate for all of the groups was 67 for the first three groups and then 68 for the high-dose NMN group. So, how does that compare to the general population? Well, in this study of more than 35,000 people, uh we can uh see the pulse, which is the heart rate, and then in this case it's the resting pulse or resting heart rate, on the Y-axis, plotted against age. And for the age range uh of the people that were in this study, 27 to 50 years old, we can see that the median uh resting heart rate was about is about 70 beats per minute, which isn't too far from the 67 to 68 for the people in this study. So, from that we can uh conclude that the amateur runners that were included in this study, uh have relatively close to average cardiovascular fitness for their age. So, this this was not a study of NMN on elite athletes. Uh, so with that in mind, which aerobic capacity metrics were improved as a result of NMN supplementation? And that's what we can see here. So, uh, I'm going to walk through each of these uh components of aerobic capacity and how NMN impacted them. So, uh, so there we can see that there are four groups and there's data for each of the four groups, control, low, medium, and high-dose NMN. And then first, we're going to see the effect of exercise. So, the six weeks of exercise training improved each of the five metrics of aerobic capacity on the left, and again, I'll go through each one of them sequentially, so just bear with me. But what we're interested in is the uh time times dose effect, T times D, uh, which is shown here. And as we can see, for those five metrics of aerobic capacity, NMN supplementation had an additive effect on improving these five metrics when compared with uh controls. So, what were the five metrics? And in order to go through that, we need to look at this graph of uh in a aerobic maximal aerobic exercise capacity test. So, starting from rest on the left, uh, we can see uh VT1, which is the first ventilatory threshold. This is the time during a maximal aerobic capacity test when your breathing rate starts to increase. And during the first ventilatory threshold, there were improvements as a result of NMN supplementation for four of the metrics here on the left. So, first, uh, now notice it says uh triangle HR, which the triangle means change. So, change in heart rate, HR, at the first ventilatory threshold. And also notice that they used uh for statistical significance, they used the hashtag, which means it's different from the medium dose, and the ampersand sign, which is different from the high dose. And as we can see, the control group uh, had a significantly lower uh, heart rate during the first ventilatory threshold, when compared with the high-dose uh, NMN group. And also, I just uh, flashed the uh, ampersand pound sign, when compared with the low-dose NMN, high-dose was also uh, they also reached a higher heart rate during the first ventilatory threshold. So, the significance is that by being able to reach a higher heart rate during the first VT, uh, the so, more heart rate, more heart beats per minute because when the heart beats, it pumps blood and oxygen throughout the body, uh, and including nutrients, uh, that allows more oxygen and nutrients to be used for metabolic work. So, in theory, you can uh, you know, run a greater distance or have greater power, et cetera, with a higher heart rate uh, relative uh, to the same time period. So, uh, along those lines, the rate of oxygen consumption during the first ventilatory threshold was also increased. And in this case, it wasn't just for the uh, high-dose NMN, medium and high-dose NMN had a higher uh, VO2, a higher rate of oxygen consumption, relative to the control group. Now, also, what about within the NMN groups? So, high NMN group were able to have a higher VO2 uh, relative to the low-dose uh, NMN group. Now, power, the change in power was also improved in the medium and high-dose NMN groups when compared with the control group. And power is force times distance divided by time. And in this case, the force is body weight, the time is the same for everyone. So, the medium and high-dose NMN groups were able to run a uh, sorry, cycle, this was a cycling, maximal cycling test, they were able to cycle for a longer distance during the first VT uh, ventilatory threshold when compared with controls. And again, when comparing between groups, we can also see that uh, uh, between the NMN groups, we can see that the high-dose NMN group also had a uh, greater power or a greater change in power when compared with the low and medium-dose NMN groups. Now, unsurprisingly, because we saw a change in the rate of oxygen consumption, the percent change in the maximal rate of oxygen consumption, uh, percent VO2 max was also better for the high-dose NMN group when compared with controls, and also for the high-dose NMN group when compared with the low-dose NMN group. And then lastly, uh, so that that sums up the changes that were all uh, during the first ventilatory threshold, but there was also one aerobic capacity metric that was improved during the second ventilatory threshold. And that's the period of time when the breathing rate increases to the point where the person is out of breath. So, during the second ventilatory threshold, although for whatever reason the authors of this study didn't include the pound sign or the ampersand sign for that data, um, the medium uh, sorry, the low and the high-dose NMN groups had a higher change in power when compared with the control group. Uh, now lastly, the last part of the uh, maximal aerobic capacity test is assessment of VO2 max, and this is uh, you know, exercising to exhaustion. And NMN did not affect VO2 max. So, with all of these data in mind, then the idea is, can differences for body weight or body composition explain this additive effect of NMN on aerobic aerobic exercise capacity metrics? So, uh, that's what they examined here, and starting from the left, uh, well, starting from the four groups, and then looking at uh, these four metrics. So, they looked at changes in body mass, in BMI, FFM, fat-free mass, which is essentially a measure of lean mass, which is a proxy for whole-body muscle mass, and then body fat percentage. So, was NMN supplementation, was that able to impact these metrics at all? So, first, exercise, these these four measures of body weight or or body composition or body mass or body composition were not different as a result of exercise. And also notice that the effect of NMN supplementation, the T times D P value were all higher than 0.05, which indicates that NMN supplementation uh, didn't impact uh, uh, body mass or composition um, when compared with uh, just the exercise effect. So, no effect of NMN supplementation on body weight or body composition. So, then the authors of the study then wanted to further investigate how is NMN potentially impacting uh, aerobic capacity or metrics of measures of aerobic capacity. So, aerobic capacity involves use of the lungs, heart, and skeletal muscle skeletal muscle as the major components. So, is the additive effect of NMN on aerobic capacity measures related to cardiopulmonary, so heart and lungs, or and or skeletal muscle function? So, starting with some cardiopulmon cardiopulmonary, sorry, cardiopulmonary metrics on the left, uh, first, looking at some heart metrics, including uh, the change, delta, the triangle is delta, so the change in maximum heart rate, uh, the change in the heart rate reserve, HRR, which is defined as the maximum heart rate uh, minus the uh, resting heart rate. And then when looking at one measure of lung function, so the VE max, which is the maximum ventilation during exercise measured in liters of air consumed per minute, we can see that although exercise uh, possibly affected each of these variables, uh, the effect of NMN did not uh, there was no additive effect of NMN on improving these measures of cardiopulmonary uh, function. So, with that in mind, they then looked at some measures of muscle function, and uh, that's what's shown here. They looked at four different measures of muscle function, including a single-leg stand test, where uh, people stood on one leg, closed their eyes, and then they recorded the amount of time that people were able to stand on one leg without touching the with the without that leg then touching the floor, handgrip strength, uh, push-ups, and then a sit-and-reach test, which is a measure of uh, lower back and hamstring flexibility. And of these four measures of muscle-related function, only the single-leg test was changed by exercise. And then there was also the T times D P value, you can see it's less than 0.05. Uh, that's uh, suggests that there was an additive effect of uh, uh NMN on on uh, on improving uh, single-leg stance relative to exercise alone and the control group. Now, then the question is, which of the groups for NMN were improved relative to the control group for the single-leg stand as a result as a result of NMN supplementation? And you can see that it's only the medium-dose uh, NMN group was was uh, better when compared with controls. But then, notice that the low-dose and the high-dose uh, you know, had almost, I mean, it's not statistically significant that those uh, groups were different from the control group in terms of the amount of time they were able to stand on one leg. But um, it just seems odd that that one group but not the other groups were able to have a better ability to stand on one leg as a result of NMN supplementation. Nonetheless, the authors of this study because they saw a difference in a single-leg stand test, but none of the cardio no differences in the cardiopulmonary metrics, they uh, proposed that it was uh, the the additive effect of NMN on the aerobic capacity metrics were as a result of changes in muscle but not the heart. Now, whether that's true, we'll need to see some additional studies from their group or others uh, in the future. Uh, that's all I've got for now. Uh, if you've made it to the end, I hope you enjoyed the video and have a great day.