[ 0m0s - 0m6s ] Resting heart rate and heart rate variability. How are they impacted by physical activity, body weight, and diet? So first, let's define a few terms.
[ 0m7s - 0m14s ] So the resting heart rate or RHR is the heart rate in beats per minute BPM while at rest.
[ 0m14s - 0m20s ] And the heart rate variability HRV is the variability for the time in between heartbeats.
[ 0m20s - 0m34s ] So if your heart rate is 60 beats per minute, the assumption is that it beats once every second, but there's variability in how often the heart beats. It may be once every 0.9 seconds, every 1 second, 1.1 seconds, etc. So that variability is the heart rate variability.
[ 0m35s - 0m55s ] All right, so how does the resting heart rate change during aging? So this is a study of 90,000 plus people. We've got average resting heart rate on the Y axis plotted against age from 20 to 85 years. And what we can see is that for both women in green and men in blue, the resting heart rate increases up until about 50 years, after which it then decreases all the way up to 85.
[ 0m56s - 1m29s ] What about HRV? How does that change during aging? So this is from a much larger study of 8.2 million plus subjects. And here we're looking at the RMSSD, that's the root mean squared of successive differences. That's one metric for measuring heart rate variability, plotted against age, and in this case, it's going from 20 to 60 years. And what we can see is when a delineating the line for men in blue, but the data for women is similar. We can see that heart rate variability is somewhere in the 70s for a 20-year-old, and then it declines to about half that in 60-year-olds for both men and women. And note that's for heart rate variability measured in the morning at 6 AM. For people that measured at 6 o'clock at night, we can see a similar trend in the dashed blue and red lines.
[ 1m41s - 1m57s ] In advanced age, for both on both of these graphs, we can see that that's characterized by relatively low resting heart rate and also a low heart rate variability. In contrast, youth is characterized by relatively low resting heart rate, at least when compared with 50-year-olds, but also a high heart rate variability.
[ 1m58s - 2m9s ] So with the goal of being chronologically old, biologically young, which factors can impact resting heart rate and heart rate variability? And as mentioned in the opening, today, I'm going to go through data for physical activity, body weight, and diet.
[ 2m11s - 2m24s ] So in terms of a measure of daily physical activity, the fitness tracker that I use also gives me data not just for resting heart rate and heart rate variability, but the average daily heart rate, so the heart rate for the whole day, not just at rest while I'm sleeping in the morning.
[ 2m26s - 2m34s ] So is the average daily heart rate significantly correlated with resting heart rate or heart rate variability. And that's what we can see here.
[ 2m34s - 2m53s ] So the resting heart rate on the Y axis plotted against my average daily heart rate for each day on the X. And what we can see is that the more active that I am on each day, that significantly correlated with a higher next day resting heart rate, significantly correlated. Conversely, the more active that I am, as indicated by the average daily heart rate, we can see that heart rate variability is significantly lower.
[ 2m55s - 3m12s ] Now, this raises the interesting idea, you know, about the optimal physical activity dose that can minimize next day variations in heart rate variability and resting heart rate while also maximizing fitness. And that's beyond the scope of this video. I'll probably address that in a future video. Actually, I'll investigate it in my data first and then present it in a future video.
[ 3m13s - 3m16s ] All right, so what about body weight? Is that correlated with heart rate variability and resting heart rate?
[ 3m17s - 4m6s ] So that data is here. And I should mention that the data for physical activity, I only had the idea to measure or to start tracking, recording and tracking my average daily heart rate in March of 2020. Although my fitness tracker has provided that since I started tracking in August of 2018, I didn't have the idea to record that. I didn't see the usefulness of it until unfortunately, March of last year. But I've been tracking and recording my resting heart rate and heart rate variability since August of 2018. So I have almost 1,200 days of data that correspond to my body weight, my morning body weight, which I've been measuring every day in the morning since 2015. So again, I've got about 1,200 days of data for correlations between resting heart rate on the Y axis, against body weight on the X.
[ 4m7s - 4m21s ] And what we can see is that the higher my body weight, that's significantly correlated with a higher resting heart rate. And remember, youth is characterized by relatively lower resting heart rates, but also higher heart rate variability. Conversely, we can see now that my, the lower my body weight, the higher my heart rate variability, significantly lower as shown there by the P value and the correlation coefficient, R.
[ 4m23s - 4m47s ] So this also raises a question, you know, what body weight optimizes both resting heart rate and heart rate variability? And as we can see for both data, somewhere around 151 pounds results or is correlated with my lowest resting heart rate, but also my highest heart rate variability. So I'm currently around 155 and slowly working towards getting back towards 150, 151 and even lower, if I can, if I can get there and sustain it.
[ 4m48s - 5m9s ] Now, note that for a given average daily heart rate, having a higher body weight on that day would result in a more daily exertional strain. In other words, if my average daily heart rate is 60 beats per minute and I weigh 150 pounds versus weighing 160 pounds because I'm carrying 10 pounds more weight, that's an overall greater daily exertion or daily strain when compared with only using the average daily heart rate.
[ 5m10s - 5m21s ] So we can combine both those metrics, body weight and the average daily heart rate, into a daily strain or daily exertion metric by multiplying them both, and then comparing them against resting heart rate and heart rate variability.
[ 5m22s - 5m47s ] So that's what's shown here. So on the Y axis, we've got resting heart rate plotted against this metric of daily exertion or daily strain. And we can see that the higher my daily exertion, that's significantly correlated with a higher next day resting heart rate, going in the wrong direction. And also going in the wrong direction with a higher daily exertion or a higher daily strain is my heart rate variability, where we can also see significantly lower HRV for a higher daily strain or daily exertion.
[ 5m49s - 5m58s ] So, um, let's put that data aside for now. We'll come back to it in a minute. I'm going to show some data where we adjust our models for this exertion metric and also, uh, with some dietary variables.
[ 5m59s - 6m3s ] So shifting over to diet, how does diet correlate with resting heart rate and heart rate variability?
[ 6m4s - 6m26s ] So the first obvious measure or metric for diet would be calorie intake. And that's what's plotted here. So we've got resting heart rate on the Y axis plotted against my daily calorie intake. And for those who don't know, I've been weighing all my food since 2015 and then tracking it and logging it into an Excel file. So I have lots of dietary data over the past three plus years that I've been tracking my fitness metrics.
[ 6m27s - 6m41s ] So now we can see the strongest data of all the data I presented so far. The higher my calorie intake, that's significantly correlated with a higher resting heart rate. And also conversely, a higher calorie intake is significantly correlated with a lower heart rate variability.
[ 6m43s - 6m51s ] So when considering all the data I've just presented, this suggests that physical activity, body weight, and calorie intake can be specifically titrated to optimize both resting heart rate and heart rate variability.
[ 6m52s - 7m10s ] And I'll go more into depth in future videos to actually see what may be optimal for me. Now, more specifically, when in terms of diet, what about diet composition? Calorie intake says nothing about whether it's higher fat, higher carbs, higher fiber, etc. So what about correlations and associations for diet composition with these metrics.
[ 7m11s - 7m22s ] So first, I'm going to present the data for heart rate variability with dietary macronutrients, because the strongest associations were present for that with lesser, but still significant associations for resting heart rate, which I'll show next.
[ 7m24s - 7m56s ] Now, note that in previous videos, although I've shown unadjusted correlations between diet and blood-based biomarkers, in this case, when considering that we know that physical activity, body weight, and also calorie intake are significantly associated with resting heart rate and heart rate variability, they should be in any model that looks at potential associations or significant associations for macronutrients with these metrics. So in this case, I created linear regression models that were adjusted for or that included daily exertion, so that body weight times average daily heart rate, and also calorie intake. And then also each of the respective macronutrients. So there are eight different models, each of them have these daily exertion and calorie intake variables, but then each of the respective macronutrients.
[ 7m57s - 8m33s ] So, um, daily exertion and calorie intake on their own, when compared with heart rate variability, account for a small but significant amount of the variance in HRV. So 5.7%. Now, that may not seem like much, especially when we look at how that relates to resting heart rate. We'll see that daily exertion and calorie intake actually explain more of the variance in resting heart rate. It's 6%, you know, and that's, you know, that the data is what it is.
[ 8m34s - 9m23s ] All right, so what's the data for macronutrients and how they relate to heart rate variability after adjusting for daily exertion and calorie intake? That's what's shown here. So there's a lot to unpack here. Let's just walk through it step by step. So in terms of macronutrients, I looked at carbohydrates, and I split carbohydrates into two different fractions: non-fructose carbohydrates and fructose. So I've been tracking both of those, uh, since 2015, so I have data for that. Uh, each of the fatty acids, so monounsaturated, MUFA, omega-3, omega-6, saturated fatty acids, SFA, and then also protein and fiber intake.
[ 9m23s - 10m4s ] And then we've got the beta coefficient plus or minus the standard error. So that's, you know, are these macronutrients associated with higher or lower HRV? The P value for whether those associations are statistically significant. The significance F. So whether or not in this case, they are. All of them are less than 0.05, so they're all statistically significant. The adjusted R squared, how much of the variance is explained in total by the three variables. Um, the percent explained relative to the base model. So how much additional variance in HRV is explained by the addition of each of the respective macronutrients. And then average daily intake, which we can use to guide how much or how little of these foods may be able to optimize heart rate variability and resting heart rate. And in the next slide, resting heart rate.
[ 10m5s - 11m26s ] So what's significant correlated with higher HRV? And in this case, we can see mono unsaturated fatty acids, omega-6, and protein intake. And then what's significantly correlated with lower HRV? Fructose, higher fructose, saturated fatty acids, lower HRV. And then also, um, fiber intake, lower HRV. And then in terms of how much additional percent of the variance that they explain. The strongest negative contributor was fiber, explaining an additional 2.1% bringing the total for that model up to 7.8%. And then relatively smaller amounts are omega-6, 0.3% and monounsaturated fatty acids, 0.4%. And then also note that although non-fructose carbohydrates were very close to statistical significance, 0.06, it's technically not statistically significant. And then omega-3 intake is not statistically significant associated with HRV.
[ 11m28s - 11m40s ] So that that summarizes the data that I just presented. This raises the interesting question, can this diet be personalized to optimize next day heart rate variability after a workout?
[ 11m41s - 12m30s ] So, when considering my average daily intake data, assuming for a typical amount of calories on a workout day, and looking at my average daily intake for each of these blue and green, red macronutrients. This suggests that eating more than 20 grams per day of mono unsaturated fatty acids, more than 11 grams per day of omega-6, more than 120 grams per day of protein. But then correspondingly less than 79 grams per day for fructose, less than 38 grams per day for saturated fatty acids, and less than 91 grams per day for fiber. May optimize my next day HRV. And I intend on, you know, following this path and then re-evaluating my data at a future point to see if it actually is still strongly or significantly correlated with HRV.
[ 12m31s - 13m6s ] All right, so what about the data for resting heart rate? And as you can see by the title, there are weaker, but statistically significant associations for these dietary components with resting heart rate. So, note that whereas the combination of daily exertion and calorie intake accounted for 5.7% of the variance explained in HRV, which is relatively small. Now, those two variables explain a much larger amount of the variance in resting heart rate, 44.4%.
[ 13m7s - 13m47s ] All right, so what's significantly associated with lower resting heart rate? And again, we can see higher mono unsaturated fatty acids and higher omega-6, but also lower carbohydrate intake, either non-fructose or fructose. And then what's significantly associated with higher resting heart rate? Higher saturated fatty acids, higher protein, and higher fiber intake. And in terms of how much, you know, how much additional variance that they explain, none of these have an individually significant explanatory power on their own.
[ 13m48s - 14m9s ] Now, this diet, you know, having relatively higher levels of MUFA and omega-6, but lower carbohydrate and fiber intake. This would suggest that I could potentially decrease my resting heart rate. Uh, but then, you know, would optimizing it and getting as much bank for my buck through diet and its impact on cardiovascular related metrics. Is that good for my overall health? In terms of big picture biomarkers that I've presented in other videos. In other words, do I optimize CV metrics, but then make the net effect worse on my overall health? So I haven't investigated that. Once I do that analysis, I'll present that data in another video. Uh, so stay tuned for that data.
[ 14m11s - 15m4s ] All right, if you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, including daily data for resting heart rate and heart rate variability and my daily dietary data, come check us out on Patreon. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.