we now have a public health problem with light that impacts on aging and we need to be very very careful about how light exposure. We've been starved of red light particularly in the built environment and one of my colleagues calls this modern scurvy because scurvy used to be a problem that sailors had because they had something missing they had vitamin C missing so they had scurvy and scurvy could kill them. We have something missing now. We have red light missing. So the built environment is now dominated by short wavelengths and the longer wavelengths aren't there anymore. So this has an impact on an aging population because we know mitochondria are regulating our blood sugars but they're also regulating degenerative diseases. There are lots of evidence now to show that mitochondrial failure is associated with dementia, memory problems etcetera and so it's a public health issue affecting aging. It drives aging. There's a thing called the mitochondrial theory of aging and it really came out in the 1950s and it just said mitochondria will determine how long you live and of all the theories of aging that come and go this one has stuck to the wall it's stuck to the wall really well. I'd love to meet the person who who generated the theory but it's guided our research very strongly. So we need to increase the deep red light that we very often can't see and we can do that in buildings. But we can also do that by just going outside in daylight. And there are some very interesting kind of observational things that come out from from this imbalance in lighting. The one that I really love NASA published a study in a very high profile journal called Cell and they said there's something wrong with the astronauts on the International Space Station. They're becoming prediabetic and they're aging more rapidly. I think those are big phrases. These people are super fit super healthy characters, they're being monitored all the time but look at a photograph in the International Space Station what you see is an environment lit with hard white LEDs and those people are up there for months under those lighting conditions. The other one that I like which is also desperately interesting is where is diabetes really peaking? Well, diabetes has many reasons, you know, for it, you know, people sit in front of televisions. But one place that really peaks is in the Arabian Peninsula. What happens in the Arabian Peninsula? You don't go outside. You don't go outside because it's too hot, it's too uncomfortable. So you sit inside. So you don't get any natural light. But then what about windows? Architects now are building buildings in glass with red light blocking glass. They block the infrared so you can control the temperature within a room within a building. So big glass structures, most people seem to have large amounts of glass in buildings. But if you've got infrared blocking glass, you've now got two things working against you, you've got the LEDs and you've got the fact that natural light is not coming through and infrared is being blocked. Quite interestingly, the Mayo Clinic is putting up a very, very expensive new building in Rochester and one of the remits they've given the architects is the building must be healthy in terms of its light and also the health of the air that's in the building. Now, the architects that were given that brief, um, were a bit surprised about the issue of light because it was only just beginning to come out. But I'm very pleased to say they walked through the door here and we had a long conversation with them. So how do you balance that issue of blocking infrared light and at the same time controlling the temperature and the health inside the building. Well, we need to find filters for glass that block only partially the infrared, allowing you to control the light in the building, but also at the same time, allowing stuff in so that you're in a healthy light environment. So I started off as a scientist, the visual scientist. If someone asked me what do I do now? I say I work in public health with an interest.