Lipoprotein A is six times more atherogenic than LDL. And that's what we'll see here. On the Y-axis we've got the genetic effect on CHD or coronary heart disease risk. And that's plotted against the genetic effect on ApoB. And more specifically, when ApoB is attached to either LDL or lipoprotein A. So, when compared with risk, when ApoB comes from LDL as shown there. Risk, when ApoB comes from lipoprotein A is six times higher relative to LDL. Which again, goes back to the initial premise of lipoprotein A is six times more atherogenic than LDL. So, there may be ways to reduce this risk. And one way may include high sensitivity C-reactive protein. Specifically, low levels. As that mediates lipoprotein A associated CVD risk. And I covered that in an earlier video. And if you missed it, it'll be in the right corner. But there may be another way to reduce lipoprotein A associated cardiovascular disease risk. And that way involves the waist to hip ratio. Which modifies lipoprotein A associated CVD risk. Which is what we'll see here. On the Y-axis we've got the cumulative incidence of having an ASCVD event. So, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease event. And for ASCVD events, they included myocardial infarction, so having a heart attack, having to be resuscitated from cardiac arrest, so when the heart stops beating, coronary heart disease, angina, which is chest pain, or stroke. And then that was plotted against follow-up time in years, up to 20 years later after the initial assessment of lipoprotein A and the waist to hip ratio. All right, so now we can ask that question. Is lipoprotein A associated ASCVD risk higher in people with a relatively low waist to hip ratio? We're going to have two groups for lipoprotein A, lower than 50 milligrams per deciliter, which is quote unquote low in blue, and relatively high lipoprotein A in red, greater than 50 milligrams per deciliter. And in terms of the waist to hip ratio, it included people with an average waist to hip ratio of 0.83. And terms of the cumulative incidence curves, the blue and the red lines, we can see that they overlap. Such that there was no significant difference between the cumulative incidence rate for people that had high or low lipoprotein A in conjunction with a low waist to hip ratio. So, for this, we can conclude that CVD risk is not relatively higher in people who have a high lipoprotein A, relative to low lipoprotein A, and a low waist to hip ratio. All right, so these were the lowest waist to hip ratios in the study. What about at higher waist to hip ratios? So now we're going to take a look at data for people who had an average waist to hip ratio of 0.93. Again, same setup, low lipoprotein A in blue, relatively high in red. And then here too, we can see that the cumulative incidence rates for ASCVD events over that 20-year span overlap. Another words, there was no significant difference between cumulative incidence rates whether someone had low or high lipoprotein A, with an average of 0.93 waist to hip ratio. So, from these data, we can conclude that CVD risk is not relatively higher in people who have a relatively high lipoprotein A, greater than or equal to 50 milligrams per deciliter, and an intermediate waist to hip ratio. All right, so how high can we go for the waist to hip ratio? And is this effect still significant? So now we're going to take a look at data for people who had an average waist to hip ratio of 1.0. And when compared with the low lipoprotein A group, now we can see that there is indeed some separation for cumulative incidence rates, and you can see by the log rank P value, they are significantly different. In other words, people who had a relatively high lipoprotein A, greater than 50 milligrams per deciliter, and for both groups that had a waste to hip ratio of 1.0, their cumulative incidence rates of having an ASCVD event was significantly higher than people who had low lipoprotein A, less than 50 milligrams per deciliter, and also that 1.0 average waist to hip ratio. So, from these data, we can conclude that CVD risk is indeed higher in people who have a high, relatively high lipoprotein A, greater than or equal to 50 milligrams per deciliter, and a high waist to hip ratio. So, what does this all mean? Well, if your lipoprotein A is greater than 50 milligrams per deciliter, get lean. And what that'll do is it'll reduce waist circumference, which is one part of the waist to hip ratio. The other part is hip. So, in order to maximize or optimize hip circumference, regular strength training, including squats, deadlifts, and other compound movements would help resist any age related decline for hip circumference. And the goal there should then be to get the waist to hip ratio to less than 0.93, if one has a lipoprotein A value that's greater than 50 milligrams per deciliter. As waist to hip ratio less than 0.93, we're not associated with an increased ASCVD risk regardless of lipoprotein A values. If you've ever wondered what's optimal for biomarkers, well, I have a new Patreon tier dedicated specifically to that. And currently includes over 35 biomarkers, more than two hours of video content, 52 published references. And note that these aren't reference ranges. It's what may be optimal based on the largest studies that exist for how each of these biomarkers changes during aging and or associations with all cause mortality risk. So, if you're interested in that, check it out. And currently, I offer blood test consults, but also post at least twice per day in four other Patreon tiers. We've also got discount and affiliate links that you can use to test yourself that help support the channel, including Ultalabtest.com, which is where I get the majority of my blood testing done, including lipoprotein A, the Clearly Filtered water filter, which I use every day, at home, metabolic panels, I'm up to 21 tests, or microbiome testing, any detesting with GenFine, epigenetic testing with True Diagnostics, at home blood testing with Sip Health, which includes the best epigenetic log, or epigenetic clocks, greymage, green tea, which has a bit of an issue now because of the tariffs impacting Japan to get green tea over here to the states, but I'm still committed to them long-term because I love their tea. Ditracker with Coinmeter, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website by me a coffee. We've also got merch, including data is my North Star, figuring stuff out is my gig, and our core aging or diane logo, which I've got on here. Link in the video description. Thanks for watching. Hope that you enjoy the video. Have a great day.