we develop these immune health grades which are measuring the balance, not not the CD4 CD8 ratio, a balance between as I'll explain in a minute between CD8 and CD4 cells. And the other is this RNA transcriptomic matrix that I described to you earlier, that is SAS1 which is survival associated signature one, mortality associated signature one. So these are immune competence genes, these are inflammation genes. So what we did here was in 2010, I believe, or 14, I'm forgetting, sorry, forgive me, my brain is not very sharp right now. But we measured uh in a paper in New England Journal of Medicine, I believe it's 2010. Um, we screened about uh 11th, 14,000 uh HIV negative people and established that the median CD4 count of human populations for HIV negative is about the lower boundary was about 800. So we use this as a metric. So if you were to send your lab results to lab core, they'll tell you that the normal range is from 340d or 350 all the way up to 1500. Well, if I had 351 CD4 cells, I wouldn't be a happy person, okay? So we needed to metricize, what is a normal? Remember, I've drawn a look at the degree of deviation from normality or some sort of a normality. So we established that CD4 count of 800 is what I would call as a good benchmark to have. And we use the CD4 CD8 ratio simply as a proxy and indirect proxy for the level of CD8 cells. We are not studying the ratio. I am studying a balance between CD4, CD8 and CD4 cells. So people who have a ratio above one, they have preserved lower amounts of CD8s compared to their CD4. So we then took people who have a ratio above one and a CD4 count of 800. We then that was grade one. We then took people who have a ratio of one, which means they've restrained their CD8 but in the context of lower CD4 cells. Then these two groups have got an inverted ratio less than one, so they have got expanded amount of CD8 cells relative to their CD4s and this is in the context of having high CD8s with lower CD4s and this is having high CD8s with low CD4s, so four grades over here. Seel, quick question. Yeah. Uh, and I have many I'll say most of those for later. And for those who don't know who we're going to yell at me for interrupting, uh, Seel and I discussed this ahead of time, so it's good with us, hopefully it's good with the audience. Um, so CD4s 800, I get that that's in the in the uh best immune health grade, the best IH grade. Um, but what it I think your population was 40 to 79 year olds or somewhere in that range. What's the do you know the average value for CD4 in say 20 year olds, 25 year olds, a bit younger and then correspondingly the average levels for uh CD8 in youth? Yeah. So, um, the general ratio across all ages will always generally be a two to one ratio. Younger adults or younger children will have higher CD4 cells. Uh, we do not study younger children, but our cohort goes all the way down to 15 years of age. Uh, it doesn't matter how you stratify your ratios and your CD4 your ratio and your CD4 cells as I will show you because we have cohorts as young as five year olds with a particular disease or infectious disease that I will mention in a minute, and it exemplifies the problem that we are dealing with. So, more important than an absolute value is the relative proportions of these cells. So, again, the ratio is not an actual I'm not interested in an actual value of CD8. I'm interested in what is the relative amount of CD8s relative to the amount of CD4 counts. And that that will become very clear here. Okay, we one more quick question. Hang on. Yeah, so uh and then it seems that CD4 is declining during aging and then CD8s increase during aging resulting in a more likely to have a lower ratio with age. Or true? Yeah. So then you are really talking about averages. So you're talking as a group how people behave. Yep. But but you will see in a minute that there are 80-year-old people who do preserve the best grade as much as a younger person does and there will be younger people who look like 80-year-old people compared to uh you know who younger people whose profiles look like 80-year-old people profiles. So, uh as a group, yes, you will see and as an average that is what would happen. But as I said, that's an average. It doesn't help me at all as a physician or you if you were to come to me and says, I want to know how good my immune health is. Most doctors will roll up their eyes and not know what to do about it. So, the idea is to metricize, that I can't metricize an average going down or up. I mean, as I said, an average of 350 cells at lab core may sound 351 might sound normal, it doesn't sound normal to me. I would be very concerned if I had 351 CD4 cells regardless if I was 20 years old or if I was 80 years old. I don't believe in averages. Averages is just a framework but doesn't really help me at all. So, the goal for us really as clinicians is to metricize it in a way that we can control heterogeneity. If we don't control heterogeneity in a population, and we just continue to use averages, we will generally perform conflated studies. So, for example, if I were to just take high CD4 count people, are we conflating group one and three? If I are people who had low CD4 count, are we conflating groups two and four? If I was to, you know, and so on. So, that that conflation is a big problem. I'm with you 100%, don't get me wrong. Uh and I agree, you know, but what I the question that I'm basically asking is, uh relative to population based averages, that can inform, so for example, I'm with you on the metrizing, you know, I I've tested blood tests 62 times over the past 10 years and a majority of my audience, a lot of people in my audience are doing that too. So but the population based average, if you know that CD4s are declining and you look at your own data, independent of whatever CD8 is doing at the moment, if you know that CD4 declines during aging in the average population and your data is 800, 750, 700, 650, then you know, I'm on I'm on a bad trend here, I need to do something to reverse that. Um so I I'd look at the population based averages as informing in terms of where your own directionality should be aiming higher for CD4s and resisting age related decline and aiming lower for CD8s and resisting their age related increase. Sure. But then what do I do with that information? If I would rather be able to if I just looked at my CD4, I would like to bin myself in some category than and further subdivide these categories that I could rationalize because I I if I just I don't have population based averages in America that I could use in Mississippi would be different. People have poverty, greater poverty, there or South Texas would be a little different than me over here. So, that doesn't really help me. What really helps me is that I can bin it and then I could even ask, okay, I felt sick today and I could tell my physician, I was in grade one before, but today I got COVID, now I'm in grade 2A or 2B or 2C, but hey guess what, I rebounded back up to grade 2A and and I didn't go ever go back up to my original grade one, now monitor me. So, I think it is really about being able to categorize oneself if you will. So like for myself, I used to be a grade, you know, my grade right now, my grade started off as a 2A, as I'll show you in a minute, during COVID, I went to a grade four, it took me a long time to get back to grade two. So, I could monitor it. So if I just followed myself as a group average, I would never be able to inform myself or others or my caretakers as to how my shifts are occurring. So, more important is not just to see where I am relative to my age, but relative to see how I shift when I get my next disease, for example, or my infection or something of that nature. And just add a little bit more, you know, if you have data in your own youth, right? So if you have 20 years of of CD4s and CD8s and even if you have the transcriptional data yet, you know, which is a commercially available, but if you know what your immune health profile looked like at at 40, and now you have an infection, and now you know what it is after infection, and it isn't reverting back to where it was in in the 40, now it's okay, what can I do, diet, lifestyle, supplements, prescription meds, whatever it may be, to try to help your immune system revert back to that more youthful state. Yep. Yep, absolutely. With you 100%, Cnel. Yep, absolutely. You see, um, uh, if I had acute kidney failure, I would know my BUN and creatinine went up, I could stage it. The difference between infectious disease doctors, gerontologists, and people with cancer. The cancer docs are way ahead of us. They like to metricize group people, stage cancer very well. You know, we don't stage diseases very well. So, it's important in my books, for me, this is a form of staging. You know, immune health is the largest organ system in the body, but physicians don't measure it. It's very sad. So, that is that is, I think, if I had to leave a parting message, it really would be that we're ignoring a very large component of our repertoire of immune of of health systems, if you will. Just to add a little more context. When you say the immune system is the largest, uh, organ in the body, is that by number of cells? So, total white blood cells are more than liver cells or kidney cells? Well, every organ system of your body is got the immune health system. From microglia in your brain, which will be there to fight, you know, fight infections, the glial system as well, the neurons as well, the brain gut axis is very well known, the brain immune axis is very well known, your entire microbial system of your gut from your mouth to your anus is a huge organ system, kidney, liver, all have got immune cells embedded in them, spleen. So, the fact is that we are being able to metricize those organ systems, but we are unable to or inefficiently at a bedside level monitor or make it accessible to have some better crude measures of immune health. This is why your your work, your lab's work is so important. So, yeah, all right, sorry. Continue, please. That's good. So, these are the four grades here. This is the large 3,000 person cohort. So, you'll see that grade one is the most common, grade two is the second most in a generally good population, less amounts of grade three and four, okay? Now, if you looked at the CD4 count, here you would argue that this CD4 count looks relatively normal. This goes back to your point. So, I have relatively, I would not say there's biologically any difference over here. But if you look at the CD8s, this is got 525 median, IG3 has got twice the amount. If you look at low CD4 counts, it's the opposite. So, here these guys have got 675 and 616, no different. But this group four has got twice the amount. So, by eye, just looking at CD4 and CD8, you can't intuit someone's immune health grades. So, this is what it would look like. Grade one being blue, brown being grade two, green being grade three, grade four, and we are taking the data from age 15 to greater than 90 years of age and our capacity to preserve blue or the best grade goes down and then expansion of the other grades. So, but there is, as I mentioned to you, even among people greater than 20, greater than 90, less number of people here, but those who survive, 20 among those 22, there are about 25% of those who do preserve blue over here. There is nothing that we will learn by studying averages. The only time we will learn anything in medicine is when we study the extremes of phenotype. So that none example over there is a great example of a person who lived a long life. So, understanding her paradox is extremely important, as much as it would be a paradox for a young child to die at an early age, who is otherwise generally healthy. So, the extremes of phenotype is how I have lived my life in understanding disease biology, okay? So, um, so, but on the other hand, the reason why studying extremes are so important is you will have younger people who have got black. And so, they've got grade four. These younger people, if you were to give them a flu vaccine, would be less responsive just as much as an older person would be less responsive. There will be some immune traits that are common to blue to blue, brown to brown, regardless of age, as I will show you in a minute in our phenotyping work, okay? So, when people study the concept of age, they are comparing older to younger people, but you're studying younger people who are heterogeneous and older people who are heterogeneous. And that leads to confounding, okay? Across age, there's female and male. Male are have a greater propensity to degrade their immune health grade one across age. So, this is not a This is actually dimorphic across age including post-menopausal, it's not all hormones, okay? So, the take-home message is, some people resist, older persons resist immune resilience, degradation, resistance is greater in females and males. And immune traits differ by two factors: age and the health grade.