And the reason why N-acetylcysteine (NAC) may be important is because, as we can see in this paper's title, it significantly increased the lifespan of fruit flies, or *Drosophila*, which is what we'll see here.

So on the left, we've got lifespan data for male flies, and female flies on the right. On the y-axis, we've got percent survival, plotted against time, or lifespan, in days. And then we've got three groups: control in black, rapamycin-treated flies in red, and then NAC-treated flies in blue.

So first, let's take a look at median survival. This is the time when half of the flies have died and half are still alive. And then we can see by the blue and red shift to the right, it's very minor, insignificant relative to what happened for maximal lifespan, as indicated by 20% survival. This is the time when 80% of the flies have died and only 20% are still alive.

And now note that both rapamycin and NAC lead to a significant extension of maximal lifespan. So that's one way to look at the data. The other is that NAC extended lifespan in *Drosophila* to the same same extent that rapamycin did, which is potentially good news for NAC and for nutmeg consumption.

Now, this effect wasn't only evident in male flies. The same situation happened in the female flies. So a minor impact on median lifespan is shown by 50% survival, but in terms of maximal survival, once again, look at that rightward shift. For both rapamycin and NAC-treated flies, which again suggests that NAC may be as good as rapamycin, at least in flies, for extending lifespan.

But one study just generally doesn't move the needle for me. I want to know if there are other studies. Is there a broader consensus of research that may suggest including nutmeg and, correspondingly, NAC, may be important for health.

In another study, NAC prevented cellular senescence in fibroblasts. Fibroblasts are found in skin, but also connective tissues. So ligaments, tendons, cartilage. So this may be important for those cell types, for those organ systems.

So with that in mind, it raises the question: How much NAC and or nutmeg may be optimal? And I don't think anybody knows the answer to that. I don't know the answer to that. So for now, I think including some nutmeg to get NAC, rather than none, may be important. So with that in mind, expect to see it for test number six, die-off composition video.