With the goal of longevity, a major focus is to optimize biomarkers of as many organ systems as possible. With that in mind, resting heart rate and heart rate variability provide information about the heart, but also the nervous system and the adrenal gland, which is what we'll see here. So resting heart rate and heart rate variability are measures that are obviously localized to the heart, but their levels are impacted by the balance between the sympathetic nervous system and the parasympathetic nervous system. More specifically, the Vegas nerve.

Sympathetic nerve activation of the adrenal gland leads the adrenal gland to produce norepinephrine, which also impacts resting heart rate and heart rate variability. All right, so what's optimal for HRV and resting heart rate? And my optimal range is a high heart rate variability with a low resting heart rate. Data that are at least 70 for women and 75 milliseconds for men, and less than 45 beats per minute for resting heart rate. And if you'd like to see those data, I have a new Patreon tier dedicated specifically to what's optimal for biomarkers, including a video, a recent video on HRV and resting heart rate. Besides HRV and resting heart rate, this also includes 33 other biomarkers, more than two hours of video content, 52 published references, and note that these aren't the reference ranges, this is what may be optimal based on how each of these biomarkers changes during aging and their associations with all cause mortality risk. So if you're interested, check it out.

In today's video, we'll take a look at what's my data as I have almost 2600 days of data for HRV and resting heart rate. And then taking that a step further, which factors may optimize long-term HRV and resting heart rate. So let's start off with HRV. As we'll see, I've consistently increased it over the past seven years. And that's what we'll see here. This is my average yearly heart rate variability since I started tracking in August of 2018 through the end of August 2025. And again, that's almost 2600 days of data. And these data are from Whoop, which I've worn all the time for that whole seven plus year period. And I'm not here to say that they're the best, I'm not here to promote them, I don't have an affiliate link, but this is only what I've worn over that seven plus year span. On the axes, we've got HRV and that's plotted against years.

So when I first started tracking in 2018, average HRV was about 47 milliseconds. And note that I've never been sedentary at any point during this seven-year journey or even before. Then I was able to start increasing HRV over time, up to an average of 56 in 2019, around 58 in 2020. I then had a regression in 2021 at 52, up to 59.3 in 2022, 66 around 66 milliseconds in 2023. And then the data has been getting a bit worse over the past two years with average values of 63 in 2024 and currently in 2025 of 59. As a quick aside, I could say well, I had this infection or this went wrong. It doesn't matter. The fact is, the best athletes are able to stay on the field and produce at a high level year after year after year. And that's what I expect when it comes to longevity. So for whatever reason, I look at it as a learning experience, whether it's infection or something else that may have limited the data. And the goal is to try to get better year after year, or at worst, maintain HRV and not allow it to suffer its age related decline.

Nonetheless, when starting with the data from 2018, we can see that I've consistently increased HRV over the seven-year span, from 47 to 59 milliseconds. And that's important or potentially important because HRV declines during aging. So at the worst, I've resisted HRV's age related decline for at least this seven-year period. But no, again, as I mentioned, the data has been going in the wrong direction over the past two years. And I won't get into the details of why that could be, although I've been detailing my progress in terms of HRV and resting heart rate every day on Patreon for a few years. So if you're interested in that story, the daily story I'd encourage you to check it out. But note that my data is finally or seems to be back on the right track. So I recently moved to Austin about two months ago and average HRV over that two-month period is currently 64 milliseconds. And there too, there are some hiccups that have knocked me off track and not intentionally. And things that actually that I'll cover in this video that were unexpected that should help the remainder of 2025 be potentially even better than 64 milliseconds. So we'll have more on that story in a minute.

What about resting heart rate? How has my resting heart rate changed over the past seven years? And that's what we'll see here. So on the axes, we've got resting heart rate and plotted against years. So here when I started tracking in 2018, average resting heart rate was 50.9 beats per minute, so around 51. And then together, and again, I think we should collectively look at HRV and resting heart rate together. Some people only talk about their HRV or only talk about their resting heart rate. They are complementary measures that add information for one versus the other. So my collective HRV and resting heart rate in 2018 was 47 for HRV and 51 for resting heart rate. Then in 2019, starting in 2019, I was able to start reducing my resting heart rate to an average of 49 beats per minute, to 48.1 beats per minute in 2020, a further reduction of 47 beats per minute in 2021, down to 45 in 2022, around 43 in 2023. And then to my lowest level yet for any year, 42.4 in 2024. And then the data has moved a bit in the wrong direction for 2025 at 43.3 beats per minute.

But nonetheless, again, note that I've consistently reduced my resting heart rate, starting in 2018 from an average of 51 beats per minute to 43 beats per minute. But note that resting heart rate follows an inverse U-shape during aging. Such that relatively low resting heart rates are found in youth, they peak around midlife and then they decline from 40 to 85 years. So am I just on the downward trend for resting heart rate and on the second half following midlife? So is the resting heart rate reduction that an indicator of youth or advanced age? So note that HRV declines during aging. So if my resting heart rate decline was an indicator of an aged phenotype, I'd expect to see a chronically lower heart rate variability. In contrast, over the past seven years, I've increased HRV while reducing resting heart rate. Which suggests that this is good news.

In terms of what's optimal though, I do have some room for improvement at least in terms of HRV. As optimal for men, for HRV, my optimal range is 75 milliseconds, as that's the median value that's found in 20-year-olds. So I've got some work to do to get my current value of 64 milliseconds on average, currently value up to at least 75. All right, so which factors may underlie my improvements or changes to resting heart rate variability? In this video I'm going to focus on three. These aren't all of the factors, but these are three of the factors that may explain a significant fraction of both HRV and resting heart rate. And the first one is skin temperature. And that might not be the one that everyone was thinking of. The first one is probably exercise, right? Just train a lot and your HRV will be super high, and your resting heart rate will be super low. But as we'll see, there's more to that story.

So skin temperature is actually a recent discovery, one that I'm most excited about. And probably one that most people aren't thinking of. So how does skin temperature correlate with HRV? And that's what we'll see here. So I have data for skin temp going back to January of 2022 through again, at the end of August 2025. And it's more than 1300 days of data. And these data are tracked by Whoop. So on the axes, HRV and that's plotted against skin temperature in degrees Celsius. In terms of Fahrenheit conversion, my range goes from 32 C or 90 F to 35.5 C and about 96 degrees Fahrenheit. And we can see that there's a significant inverse correlation between skin temperature and HRV. In other words, when my skin temperature reading is higher, relatively higher, that's significantly correlated with a lower HRV going in the wrong direction, following its age related trend. On the other hand, on days when my skin temperature is relatively lower, that's significantly correlated with a higher HRV.

All right, what about resting heart rate? So here we can see the opposite trend. A higher skin temperature is significantly correlated with a higher resting heart rate. And again, that's plotted against the previous day's average heart rate. So when my skin temperature is higher, my heart rate goes up. This is more of a stress response. When my skin temperature is lower, my heart rate goes down.

So then this raises the question, which factors impact skin temperature? And there may be many. But one may be one that most people aren't thinking of, and that's mattress type. And I learned this unfortunately, the hard way. So I mentioned that I moved to Austin about two months ago. So I bought an air mattress as what I thought was a temporary fix, as my bed hadn't yet arrived, even though I ordered it a week before moving to Austin. So while on the air mattress, over the 53 nights that I've been in Austin, average HRV and resting heart rate are 64:43. Now, during that time too, average skin temp was 34.2 degrees Celsius. Now my new bed finally arrived, and it was this model here. And again, I'm not affiliated or sponsored, this is just my story, this is just what I did. I bought what I thought was a bed that was going to be best or one of the best for cooling or it should be good for helping me keep me cool at night. This was before I even knew about this correlation with skin temperature. And in their title, it says most affordable cooling. I mean, that's either clever marketing or maybe it's a real effect. At the time, I wasn't as educated on the mattress and the impact of mattresses on skin temperature as I am now, as I've been forced to do a deep dive into that subject. So when the bed first arrived, obviously I slept on it. And my HRV and resting heart rate looked like I had a workout on the day prior, even though it was arrest day. So then I thought, oh, this is a weird thing, maybe I need to let the bed degas or off gas. So I put the bed outside for about a week, in and out for about a week. Didn't sleep on it. Brought it back in. HRV and resting heart rate again, looked like after a workout day, despite it being an rest day. So then I put the bed away, didn't sleep on it, went back to the air mattress, Revisited it about a month later. And the same phenotype. I mean, I saw heart rate variability and resting heart rate values over those two days that I haven't seen except for like, infection, which is outrageous that a bed can make that big of an impact on my HRV and resting heart rate. So for the four nights that I slept on it over two months, you know, being in Austin, average HRV and resting heart rate is 54:46. Which compared to 64:43. So it's a big dent. I don't think I've seen a dent in HRV and resting heart rate of 54:46. Even on workout days, which is when you'd expect to see the biggest impact on these metrics. So in hindsight, I bought a memory foam based bed, which again, I didn't know at the time, but memory foam beds tend to run hotter than either hybrid or inner spring focused beds or constructed beds. So with that in mind, I've bought a new bed. And I'm still waiting on that. It should arrive next week. And I'm going to let it off gas for about a week. And then I'm going to have to repeat this cycle of is the bed allowing for maximal cooling and not helping to raise my skin temperature. So on the four nights that I slept on the new bed, average skin temp was 34.8. And when using a two sample t-test to compare these two groups of data, the four nights on the new bed versus the 53 nights on the air mattress, they are significantly different. So if you're struggling with HRV and resting heart rate, your mattress may have something to do with it. And in hindsight, I bought a memory foam based bed, which again, I didn't know at the time, but memory foam beds tend to run hotter than either hybrid or inner spring focused beds or constructed beds.

What about body weight? Body weight is another factor that may impact both HRV and resting heart rate. And we'll start off with the data for body weight and HRV as shown there. And this is where I have the most data. As I have tracked body weight data on all days of HRV and resting heart rate tracking, so almost 2600 days going back from August of 2018 to late August of 2025. On the axes, we've got HRV and that's plotted against body weight on the X. And here we can see a significant inverse correlation between body weight and HRV. In other words, when body weight has been higher, that's significantly correlated with lower HRV. And when body weight has been on the lower side, that's significantly correlated with higher HRV. And my current body weight is about 141 pounds. So that would put me somewhere towards the lower end of this correlation. And towards the higher end of HRV. So I could go lower for body weight, but in my experience, going lower than 140 or 141, I'm currently 5'7". That starts to mess with in workout performance. And I'm not trying to lose strength or muscle mass. The goal is to optimize that while also optimizing HRV and resting heart rate.

So what's the correlation with resting heart rate? So over the same time period, from March of 2020 through August of 2025, now we can see a significant positive correlation. And again, another strong correlation. As the correlation coefficient is greater than 0.75. So here too, the higher the average resting heart rate, the worse the next day's resting heart rate. And again, that shouldn't be much of a surprise. If we do a hard workout, it's reasonable to expect that HRV should be lower and resting heart rate should be higher on the next day. And I'm not at all suggesting that we remove workouts in order to improve long-term HRV and resting heart rate. On the other hand, it suggests that balancing active versus less active days is important for optimizing HRV and resting heart rate. What does that look like? So here's a one week plot. Actually, this is the end of August for my average daily heart rate. So on one of those days, I'll work back track to the first two days. And then on that third day, I included 15 minutes of hit, high intensity interval training on the bike, outside. And then on the next day, I did my standard 60 minute workout. So a full body compound movement focused workout. It also includes calisthenics, mobility, flexibility, balance, everything. Everything aimed at full body functional strength optimization. And then note that on the two subsequent days, I purposely tited activity lower from 56 to 54 beats per minute and then 52 beats per minute. As in my experience, if I don't allow my average daily heart rate to come down, that won't allow HRV to go back to its relatively high level and resting heart rate to go down to its lowest level. So I can just train through everything and be chronically overtrained, not just in the gym or in the workouts, but also based on these metrics of stress, cardiovascular and adrenal function, HRV and resting heart rate. So after that second day, HRV and resting heart rate were close to where they usually are or better. So then I included another 60 minute workout. And then that takes us into the next two days where I would tite activity lower. So 57 versus say, 53, 54 beats per minute, and then 52 beats per minute. This is the approach that I've used for a very long time. I let HRV and resting heart rate dictate intensity, duration, and frequency of my workouts, with the goal of optimizing not just long-term fitness and health, but also HRV and resting heart rate.

So now we can put the story all together by asking the question, what percentage of HRV can be collectively explained by these three variables: skin temp, body weight, and the average daily heart rate? So let's start off with resting heart rate, which is what we'll see here. So this is a multivariant linear regression model where we've got the collective association between those three variables, again, skin temp, body weight, and the average daily heart rate, against resting heart rate. And collectively, we can see that there's a significant association. These three variables are collectively associated with resting heart rate. As the significance F is far below a P value of 0.05. You can see it's 6 times 10 to the negative 27, 279. So this is a very strong association. In terms of the adjusted R squared, this is the proportion of variability in resting heart rate that can be explained by just these three variables. It's 0.63 or 63%. In other words, 63% of the variability inherent in resting heart rate can be explained by just these three factors. So that's on the one hand. On the other hand, that means that there's 37% that I haven't yet discovered.

So the three factors that explain the most, skin temp, body weight, and the average daily heart rate. So now let's look at HRV. So same setup, those three variables, skin temp, body weight, and the average daily heart rate, and their collective association with heart rate variability. And here too, is significantly associated. These three factors are collectively associated with HRV. And in terms of the proportion of variability explained by these three factors for HRV, it's lower, but still pretty good, 0.36 or 36%. So together, these three factors explain 63% of resting heart rate and 36% of HRV.

So all right, now we can put the story all together by asking the question, what percentage of HRV can be collectively explained by these three variables: skin temp, body weight, and the average daily heart rate? And what percentage of resting heart rate can be collectively explained by these three variables? So this is a multivariant linear regression model where we've got the collective association between those three variables, again, skin temp, body weight, and the average daily heart rate, against HRV. And collectively, we can see that there's a significant association. These three variables are collectively associated with HRV. As the significance F is far below a P value of 0.05. You can see it's 6 times 10 to the negative 27, 279. So this is a very strong association. In terms of the adjusted R squared, this is the proportion of variability in HRV that can be explained by just these three variables. It's 0.36 or 36%.

So, all right, that's all for now. If you're interested more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon where I offer blood test consults that also include optimizing HRV and resting heart rate. I also post at least twice a day in four other Patreon tiers, including using Luma, which I use every day, fair life filter, which I use every day, at home test with infinity, epigenetic test with true diagnostics, Cyrex, which has the best epigenetic clocks amongst epigenetic clocks. Grimage, green tea, which I drink every day, ditracking with chronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch, including data is my North Star, figuring stuff out is my drug, which is what I've got on here, and the conquer aging or die trying logo as shown there. Link in the video description. Thanks for watching. Hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.