For blood test number six in 2025, when using Dr. Morgan Levine's biological age calculator PhenoAge, we saw that my biological age was 35.4 years, which is about 17 years younger than the chronological. But does this biological age clock PhenoAge, does it have blind spots? If you'll notice, when looking at its nine component biomarkers, it doesn't include cardiovascular disease-related biomarkers, which then raises the question, is this clock good for its association with cardiovascular disease-related mortality? And in fact, it is. So, that's what we'll see here. For every one year increase for PhenoAge, for biological age using this test, that was significantly associated with a 10% higher risk of death from cardiovascular disease-related outcomes. So, this clock is a decent clock for evaluating CVD mortality risk. But, I think we can do better. And in this video, we're going to do a deep dive into Blood Test number six and all of my blood test data over the past 10 years, and we're going to take a look at cardiovascular disease-related biomarkers. Starting with page one of the blood test report. Now, note that I don't go to my doctor to order my blood tests, I go to ultalabtest.com, where I pick exactly the test that I want. I then bring the the lab form to Quest Diagnostics, and then we can see I get my results relatively quickly. I tested on September 16th around 7:30 in the morning, and I had almost all of my results, not just the one shown here, within five days. So, if you're into blood testing like me and you want to help support the channel, you can do that by using an affiliate link in the video's description. All right, so let's start off with the lipid panel. And more specifically with HDL. Now, if we look specifically at the reference range, anything higher than 40 milligrams per deciliter for HDL is considered good. But what's optimal for HDL? My reading of the published literature is that 50 to 69 milligrams per deciliter for HDL is optimal. And that's based on how HDL changes during aging and its association with risk of death for all causes. So, when considering that 50 to 69 optimal range, then we can put a green arrow as for this test, HDL was 60 milligrams per deciliter, right in that optimal range. But this is just one test. And I think that we shouldn't highlight one or a couple of tests. What's most important is cumulative exposure over a long period of time. So, with that in mind, recent data for HDL is good news. As for the 19th test in a row, HDL has been greater than or equal to 50 milligrams per deciliter with an average of 58 milligrams per deciliter over the 19 test span. That's about three years of testing. And that's particularly good news, because for the previous 44 tests, and these 63 tests, I should note, are over the past 10 years. And yes, I've been testing at least six times per year on average because I want to have a lot of data that's closer to the truth relative to one or two tests per year. So, for that previous 44 test average, it was 45 milligrams per deciliter. So, I've been able to improve my HDL over the past three years, which could be good news for others who are struggling with relatively low HDL and they want to get that into the optimal range. Now, note that apoA1 may be a better predictor of CVD or heart disease-related mortality risk. And if you're interested in that paper, I'll link to it in the video's description. So, with that in mind, I've been measuring apoA1 for the last few tests too. So, what is my apoA1 data? That's what we'll see here. And when just starting off with the reference range, anything greater than 115 milligrams per deciliter is the lab's target in terms of what we should be aiming for. Which then raises the question of what's optimal and how does my data compare there? So, you can see I've given it an orange arrow. I haven't given it a green arrow. So, that suggests that there's trouble on the waters. So, in terms of what's optimal for apoA1, my reading of the literature is 150 to 180 milligrams per deciliter. And if you're wondering where I'm getting those data from, I have a new Patreon tier dedicated specifically to what's optimal for biomarkers, including data for HDL and apoA1, but also 33 other biomarkers, more than two hours of video content, 52 published references. And again, these aren't the reference ranges. You can get that from any LLM these days. It's what may be optimal based on how each of these biomarkers changes during aging and or associations with risk of death for all causes in the largest studies that I can find. So, if you're interested in that, check it out. All right, so, back to our story. Now, note that HDL contains apoA1. Which then raises the question, because almost all apoA1 comes from HDL, do we even need to measure both? So, that's what we'll see here, and I've been measuring both. This is seven tests for apoA1 on the Y axis, plotted against HDL on the X, from 2024 to 2025. And then we can see that they are strongly correlated. When the correlation coefficient, the lower case R, is greater than 0.7, that's that's considered a strong correlation. So, in this case, the correlation between apoA1 and HDL in my data, I don't know if this would be true for others, the only way to find out is to test, the correlation is 0.95. Now, to put that into perspective, a correlation of 1.0 is perfectly linear. So, this is a very strong correlation that is close to perfectly linear for apoA1 with HDL. So, in terms of addressing the question, do we need to measure both, when consider in my when considering that in my data, they are strongly correlated and almost perfectly linear, maybe not. But then, I want to optimize both of them at the same time. So, what level of HDL corresponds to an apoA1 that's greater than 150 milligrams per deciliter to get me into both optimal ranges? And we can see that based on extrapolation of the trend line, that may be true for HDL in the 67 or at least 67 milligrams per deciliter. So, to cover both bases, 67 to 69 could be a specific optimal range for me that keeps HDL optimal and gets me into the apoA1 optimal range. So, for test number seven, my HDL target is 67 milligrams per deciliter. So, this is part of the story. In in evaluating cardiovascular disease risk, HDL is part of the story. Another part of the story are apoB containing lipoproteins, including VLDL, lipoprotein A, LDL, and IDL, or intermediate density lipoprotein. Now, IDL isn't commonly reported on the standard lipid panel that you get from a blood test. So, I'm not going to focus on that in this video. And note that it's a very minor component of the overall lipid profile. Almost all of apoB comes from VLDL, lipoprotein A and LDL. So, I'm going to ignore IDL for the purpose of this video. So, for each of these four lipoproteins, though, we can see that they contain the apoB 100 protein, or apoB for short. All right, so what's my data? So, we'll start off with apoB, which is shown there. And if we go based on the reference range, anything less than 90 is good. And then, they even direct us with more information saying that less than 80 may be optimal based on certain conditions. Now, I don't have pre-existing CVD, I don't have diabetes, but in terms of what's optimal for apoB, my reading of the literature is that less than 70, which is associated with lowest cardiovascular disease and all cause mortality risk in the general population, may be optimal. So, that's my target for apoB. And based on that, we can see that for this test, it was 59 milligrams per deciliter. So, even by my strict interpretation of the literature, apoB seems to be good news. Now, I should note that that 59 for apoB is not because of a statin. I am not on a statin. I've never been on a statin and I have no intention of ever going on a statin. The why behind that is a story for another day, but this is all diet, exercise and leanness. So, for those who are are thinking about trying to lower their apoB, it's 100% doable by diet. Now, even if apoB is low, note that if lipoprotein A and VLDL are primary fractions, CVD risk will be higher relative to LDL. And that's because VLDL and lipoprotein A are more atherogenic relative to LDL. Which is what we'll see here. On the Y axis, we've got the genetic effect on coronary heart disease risk. And then on the X axis, we've got the genetic effect on apoB. And more specifically, when apoB is attached to either LDL or lipoprotein A. What we can see on this plot is that when apoB is found in lipoprotein A, that's associated with a six-fold higher CHD risk relative to when apoB is found in LDL. More succinctly, per lipoprotein particle, so per lipoprotein A particle or per LDL particle, lipoprotein A is six times more atherogenic relative to LDL. And the a similar story is true for VLDL. As we can see, per particle VLDL are more atherogenic than LDL. And then the authors of this study rationalize that this effect is counterbalanced by a higher LDL abundance as most people have dramatically higher LDL relative to VLDL. But that doesn't change the fact that per VLDL or per LDL, VLDL's more atherogenic relative to LDL. So now, the goal isn't just to have low apoB. In my opinion, the goal is to have low apoB, low lipoprotein A, and low VLDL, all three together. So, with that in mind, what's my data? So then, back to the blood test report. Starting off with lipoprotein A. And if we go based on the reference range, we can see that my data is now outside of it. It got flagged by the lab. As my data for this test was 81 nanomolar. And I should mention, this isn't an aberrant finding. Almost all of my my lipoprotein A over the past 10 years, 35 tests, is either just outside of the reference range or a bit higher than that. I've had lipoprotein A values as high as 145 nanomolar over those 35 tests. But also, on the other hand, I've had it as low as 70 nanomolar. So, there is this published idea that lipoprotein A is generally resistant to reduction. And there may be some truth to that because I haven't gotten lipoprotein A lower than about 70 nanomolar over 35 tests yet. But, when considering my highest value of 145 nanomolar, and my current 81 to 90 nanomolar, which is a pretty consistent average test to test more recently, it is malleable. It's just a matter of figuring out the recipe, one's own personalized recipe, for keeping it as low as genetically possible. Now, there may be a silver lining in the lipoprotein A story in my case. Maybe different for others. And that involves HSCRP. And I did a deep dive into the link between HSCRP and lipoprotein A in a previous video, which I'll link to in the right corner. So, if you missed that, I'd encourage you to check it out. For now, we'll just briefly summarize by saying that lipoprotein A associated CVD incident risk is significantly higher when HSCRP is greater than two milligrams per liter. So, we can see that for this test, it was 0.2 milligrams per liter, which is 10 times lower than that cut off. So, that's potentially good news for HSCRP and its link with lipoprotein A associated CVD incident risk. But note that this isn't just one test. HSCRP has been less than 0.3 milligrams per liter for now 27 consecutive tests, and it's been less than 0.2 milligrams per liter for 10th consecutive tests. So, HSCRP, again, good news within the lipoprotein A context. All right, so next up are triglycerides. And if we focus on the reference range, anything less than 150 is considered okay. So, we can see that for this test, I was at 78 milligrams per deciliter, which technically is good news based on the reference range, but then again, it raises the question of what's optimal for triglycerides. And note that triglycerides, when you divide them by by five, you get VLDL. So, this is also a VLDL story. In terms of what's optimal for triglycerides, my target, based on my reading of the literature, which is primarily based on a study of about 5 million people, is less than 45 milligrams per deciliter, as that was associated with lowest risk of death from coronary heart disease. Now, note that 78 milligrams per deciliter may seem like bad news as it's a bit of ways away from 45 milligrams per deciliter. But again, cumulative exposure. So, over 63 tests over the past 10 years, average triglycerides are 60 milligrams per deciliter. But I should say, there's more to that story too, because more recently, over the past 21 tests over the past three years, triglycerides have started to creep higher at 65 milligrams per deciliter. And that's important because triglycerides and accordingly VLDL, increases during aging. Now, 65 or 60 versus 45 may not seem like a big deal. But when we're talking about rates of aging, what is the rate of heart disease or atherosclerotic progression for someone who's kept their triglycerides, and correspondingly VLDL, low, really low, less than 45 milligrams per deciliter, indefinitely, versus 60. I don't know the answer to that, but I I'd imagine that the rate of progression for atherosclerosis, so heart disease, would be at its lowest if triglycerides and correspondingly VLDL were below that 45 milligram per deciliter cut off for triglycerides, and for about nine for VLDL. All right, next up is LDL. And here too, if we go based on the reference range, anything less than 100, and even a bit lower, is recommended based on the reference range. But in terms of what's optimal, and that comes from that study of about 5 million people too, lowest CHD mortality risk was associated with an LDL that was in the 65 to 120 range. And actually, when LDL was less than 65, that was significantly associated with a small, but again, significant increase CHD mortality risk. So, we can see that my data for this test at 57 milligrams per deciliter is a bit too low. And although there is this thought that absolutely lower is better better for LDL, I now think about this all differently. For test number seven, how I think about it is, I want to keep my apoB really low. If I can get it again to 60 milligrams per deciliter, that's the target. But, I want the composition of the lipoproteins within that apoB to be significantly different or better than where it was for this test. More specifically, I want to reduce my triglycerides, I want to reduce lipoprotein A, and to keep apoB relatively low, that means higher LDL. So, if that means LDL goes to 85, but lipoprotein A goes to 65, 65 nanomolar, if triglycerides go down to, say, 60 or 55, even 50, and correspondingly VLDL will be about 10, that would be a better profile relative to this profile. So, even though apoB is low, I think there is a higher level to this, which includes tracking lipoprotein A, VLDL, and LDL specifically. But then, another question is, how do I plan on making these improvements? So, I'm a data guy, and I try to use correlations to move biomarkers towards youth and lowest risk of death for all causes. And that primarily includes by looking at correlations for diet with biomarkers. In terms of those correlations, let's take a look at a few that are significantly correlated with lipoprotein A, including net carbs, which is on the left, or is going to be on the left, and then also total fat. And note that this is a small snapshot of what's significantly correlated with lipoprotein A. And if you want to see the full correlation list, that's in the diet versus biomarkers correlation tier on Patreon. And note that this isn't just correlations for diet with lipoprotein A. I've got correlations for all of the big picture biomarkers, not just CVD-related biomarkers, but kidney, liver, immune, red blood cells, etc. So, if you're interested in that, check it out. For now, let's start with the correlations with net carbs, with lipoprotein A on the Y axis and average daily net carb intake on the X. In terms of how I'm able to look at correlations, since 2015, I've weighed almost all of my food with a food scale. Almost 99%. I then take that data, enter it into a diet tracking app, Chronometer. And if you want to use that diet tracking app yourself, there's a discount link in the video description. I then pull that data into a spreadsheet. And now, every blood test has a corresponding average dietary intake. In other words, if there are 50 days in between blood tests, if I take the average of those 50 days, I can then line it up with the latter blood test. And now, because every blood test has a corresponding average dietary intake, I can look at correlations by getting enough data. Once you get to like three tests, you can start looking at correlations. Now, granted, there's going to be a lot of noise in the data after three tests. But as we'll see for lipoprotein A, I have 35 tests, there should be less noise at this point. So, in terms of the correlations between net carb intake with lipoprotein A, we can see that in my case, there's a significant positive correlation. In other words, when net carb intakes have been relatively higher, that's significantly correlated with higher lipoprotein A. And conversely, when net carb intakes have been lower, that's significantly correlated with lower lipoprotein A. Now, for test number six, for the dietary period that preceded test number six, I average 225 grams of net carbs per day. Now, I've intentionally cut that for test number seven to 100 an average of 192 grams per day. And based on extrapolation of the trend line, I should expect to see lipoprotein A move a bit lower. All right, so this is part of the story. What about total fat? On the Y axis, again, lipoprotein A, and now we're looking at average daily fat intake on the X. And here, we've got a significant inverse correlation. So, when total fat intakes have been relatively high, that's significantly correlated with lower lipoprotein A. And when fat intakes have been relatively low, that's significantly correlated with higher lipoprotein A. So, for test number six, average daily fat intake was 84 grams per day, which I've intentionally increased since then to an average of 101 grams per day. And based on extrapolation of the trend line, I should expect to see lipoprotein A move lower. Now, I should mention that if the data don't move as expected, these correlations will weaken, other correlations will pop up higher than them on the chart, on the list, and then I'll go after those correlations with the goal of moving lipoprotein A lower. Now, note that total fat doesn't indicate which type of fat that I should be altering or altering my intake of to try to move the lipoprotein A needle. Total fat includes mono-unsaturated, saturated, poly-unsaturated, including omega-3 and omega-6. Now, of those four fat types, the one that is closest to significance, none of them have a P value less than 0.05, but the one that's closest to significance is MUFA, or mono-unsaturated fatty acids. As you can see, it has a significant inverse correlation with lipoprotein A, and that P value is just outside of significance at 0.06. Now, in terms of the stats here, I get that some people may say, oh, it's not significant, don't even try it. But the only way to know is to test. And I could exclude it as MUFA is not significant and maybe it's something else. But the fact is, of those four fat types, this is the one that is most strongly correlated with lower lipoprotein A in my data. And the only way to find out, as I just mentioned, is to test. So, for test number six, prior to the most recent test, I averaged 29 grams of MUFA per day. I've intentionally increased that for the next test, test number seven, to my highest ever intake that corresponds to any test over the past 10 years, again, 35 tests for lipoprotein A, to an average of 41 grams per day. So then the big question is, will it work? And I'm planning on testing, test number seven on October 27th, and it takes me a a little bit of time to crunch the numbers and analyze the data. First, the data is posted on Patreon, so if you're interested in that, check it out. If not, expect to see an update video sometime by the end of November. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon where I offer blood test consults and I also post at least twice per day in four other Patreon tiers. We've also got a whole bunch of discount and affiliate links that you can use to test yourself that helps support the channel, including ultalabtest.com, which is where I get the majority of my blood tests done, the clearly filtered water filter, which I use every day, at home metabolomics, I'm up to 20 tests, or a microbiome composition, NDI testing with Genfinity, epigenetic testing with True Diagnostic, at home blood testing with Cyfox Health, which includes GrimAge, which is the best epigenetic clock of epigenetic clocks for its association with risk of death for all causes, green tea, which I drink every day, diet tracking with Chronometer, which I mentioned in in the video. Or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch, including data is my North Star, figuring stuff out is my drug, which I've got on here, and the Conquer Aging or Die Trying logo. If you're interested in that, link in the video description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.