Trimethylamine N-oxide, which is otherwise known as TMAO, is bad for health. And that's what we'll see here. So TMAO negatively impacts the kidney, brain, high blood pressure, heart failure, peripheral vascular disease, and also atherosclerosis. So in today's video, we'll take a deep dive into which factors impact plasma levels of TMAO. Additionally, later in the video, what's my data? As I have 21 tests tracking this important biomarker. But for now, let's take a look at which foods contain TMAO. TMAO is found in fish. And that's what we'll see here. On the Y axis, we've got the concentration of TMAO and its precursor metabolite, TMA or trimethylamine, and I'll have more on that mechanism coming up in just a bit. And on the X axis, we've got many different fish types. So in terms of where the highest content of TMAO and TMA is found, it's in cod, lobster, and orange roughy. But what about fish types that are commonly consumed by those of us who belong in the longevity community? For example, salmon. Well, we can see that farm-raised salmon is very low for its content of TMAO and TMA. But I wouldn't recommend that anybody consume farm-raised salmon. I'd prefer to get the wild-caught version where there, we can see that it has more TMA plus TMAO relative to farm-raised salmon. When considering that TMAO is found in fish, that would suggest that fish may be associated with some of those adverse health related outcomes for TMAO that I just showed in the previous slide. On the other hand, gut bacteria produce trimethylamine, which is what we'll see here. So starting off in the intestine, dietary precursors including betaine, choline, and ergothionine are converted by gut bacterial enzymes into TMA or trimethylamine. TMA then travels through the blood to the liver, where it is converted, actually oxidized by the liver into trimethylamine N-oxide or TMAO. So with that in mind, which foods contain these TMAO precursors? Well, for the first three, carnitine, choline, and betaine, they're found in beef, eggs, and shrimp. And I should say, some of you probably, probably yelling at me, this guy's anti-meat. No, that's not at all what I'm about to go through. I'm going to say actually the opposite. These foods have been unfairly villainized for their potential role in TMAO formation. And I'll show why that's the case in a minute. And that's because in part, because betaine is also found in non-meat containing foods, including beets. And ergothionine is found in high abundance in mushrooms. So if the TMAO story, being found in blood, was as simple as eat less meat, well, what about vegans who are eating no meat but are eating lots of mushrooms and lots of beets? Potentially, that could be converted into TMA and corresponding TMAO too. So the gut bacteria TMAO story isn't as simple as reducing intake of these specific foods. And we'll see why that's true in a second. For that, we'll take a look at which factors impact gut bacterial trimethylamine production. And a main factor that controls whether or not TMAO is produced is the pH in the gut lumen. So the gut lumen is the inside of the tube that is the intestine. Under normal conditions, it should be acidic, not alkaline. However, when the pH inside of the gut lumen becomes more alkaline, that leads to the growth of pathogenic bacteria which produce TMA, which is then correspondingly oxidized to TMAO in the liver. Those pathogenic bacteria don't just produce TMA and correspondingly TMAO, they also produce other metabolites that are bad for health, including indoxyl sulfate, IS, and para-cresol sulfate, PCS. And I've covered those other metabolites, those other gut bacteria derived metabolites in videos on the channel. And I'll link to a couple of them in the right corner. So once they're produced inside of the gut lumen, they can then diffuse as shown here, in between the spaces for epithelial cells which are normally connected by tight junctions, which would be disrupted in this case, and then they can be found in the blood. Now, the importance of that lumen pH rise being a significant contributor to TMA production is that fecal pH increases during aging, which is what we'll see here. So on the Y axis, we've got fecal pH, and then we've got three groups: CE is centenarian, older, and then young subjects. So first, we can see that centenarians had significantly higher fecal pH relative to young subjects. And if we're looking at the actual numbers, the average fecal pH in the centenarians was eight, and it was seven in the young subjects. Now you could say eight versus seven, so what, that's not a big pH difference. But pH is a log scale. Which means that the pH in the centenarians was 10 times less acidic relative to the younger subjects. So with that in mind, which factors impact lumen pH? Well, a major factor is fecal levels of short chain fatty acids, or SCFAs. These SCFAs include acetate, propionate, and butyrate, which can be produced by a high fiber diet, but also exercise training. So if someone is eating a relatively low fiber diet and lots of meat, we could expect to see high levels of TMAO. Alternatively, if someone is not doing any exercise training, we could expect to see relatively low levels of fecal short chain fatty acids, and correspondingly high levels of TMAO. Now, it should be mentioned, there's more to that story. It also involves kidney function and removing TMAO. But a major part of this story is acidification of the gut lumen and limiting the growth of bacteria that can produce TMA in the first place. Now, what's optimal? Can we put a specific number on plasma levels of TMAO? So that's what we'll see here. This is a meta-analysis of 10 studies that looked at relative risk or risk of death for all causes, plotted against plasma levels of TMAO. In terms of what was significant, we put up that red line at a hazard ratio of one again. And now, when the shaded blue region is completely below one or completely above one, we have a significant association. And we can see that that's for true at low levels when TMAO was less than two micromolar, as the shaded blue region is completely below that hazard ratio of one. On the other hand, when TMAO levels reached greater than four micromolar, that was significantly associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. But this is just half of the equation for defining what may be optimal. The other side of the equation is how does TMAO change during aging? Which is what we'll see here. With plasma levels of TMAO in young, middle-aged and older, MA/O groups. For the young subjects, they were 20 to 27 years old, and for the middle-aged to older, they were 50 to 79 years old. So first, we can see that two micromolar value pops up again as the average value found in youth, which then approximately tripled in the middle-aged and older groups. So in terms of defining what's optimal when putting these two pieces of data together. First, less than two micromolar as the target, as that was consistent across both of these studies, but then also avoiding the age-related increase. Now, note that TMAO can be tracked. This isn't just a health and longevity news channel. This is also a health optimization channel. So TMAO can be tracked. And with that in mind, I've been using at-home metabolomics kit, the kit shown here, with 623 metabolites. So if you want to use this kit yourself, discount link in the video description. So, what's my data? That's what we'll see here. Plasma levels of TMAO over the past three years, from 2023 to 2025. And again, I have 21 tests over this three-year period. So when I first started tracking in 2023, over five tests, average TMAO was 7.3 micromolar. Over nine tests in 2024, a bit better, 6 micromolar, average. And then after the first seven tests in 2025, average TMAO is 4.6 micromolar. So, how can we put this into the context of what's optimal? Well, half of that equation was avoiding the age-related increase. And for at least this three-year period, this is good news. But the other side of the equation, what's optimal, is less than two micromolar. And unfortunately, with average values for all three of these years, I have failed. I haven't been able to do that yet. But there's good news, potentially good news in this story, where I may have discovered what the recipe is for helping to keep it low in my case. As we can see that I've been able to achieve relatively low levels of TMAO, below that two micromolar target, for at least two of these 21 tests. And note that for two additional recent tests, it was a bit closer to four micromolar on the right track towards getting it to less than two micromolar. But is this random variability, just random test-to-test variability, or am I doing something? So, how can I reduce, how can I further reduce plasma levels of TMAO? So for now, we're going to take a look at correlations between diet with plasma levels of TMAO. And for those who may be unfamiliar, I've weighed almost all of my food with a food scale since 2015. So for the past 10 years, probably 99% or more, all of it with a food scale. I then take that data and enter it into a spreadsheet. So now each test has an average dietary intake that is lined up together. So with enough tests, because I have tracked dietary intake, I can look at correlations. And that's what we'll see here, with the top portion of the correlations for diet versus TMAO, as shown there. And note that if you want to see the full correlation list, I have a specific tier on Patreon, a correlations tier, that doesn't just include correlations for diet with TMAO, but all of those 623 metabolomics metabolites, but then also 25 to 30 standard clinical chemistry biomarkers that I test eight times per year. So if you're interested in that, check it out. On this list, we've got the lowercase R, which is the correlation coefficient, and then to the right, we've got the P value, where I've used less than 0.005, nominally significant, as the significance threshold. In terms of what was significant, and at the top of the list, we see garlic. And there's a negative correlation there. So what that means is or what that suggests is that relatively higher intakes of garlic in my case, the recipe may be different for others, I'd encourage tracking your own data to try to discover your own personalized recipe. Are significantly correlated with lower levels of TMAO. But garlic isn't the only inverse correlation with TMAO on this list. We can see that there are many others, including zinc, avocado, nutmeg, celery, non-fat yogurt, move for, or monounsaturated fatty acids, olives, and black pepper. Now, I also don't know if any of these are actually causative. So what I generally try to do is to follow as many on the list as possible with the goal of moving a biomarker and the quote-unquote right direction and away from age-related trends. But note that there are also positive correlations on this table, including banana, dates, and salt. So what that suggests is when intakes of these foods are relatively higher, that's significantly correlated with higher levels of TMAO. And that would be data moving in the wrong direction. So, in terms of interventions that I've made for test number 22, I decided to follow or specifically decided to follow the garlic correlation. But the table shows isn't how much garlic that I should actually add to try to make a dent on plasma levels of TMAO. So let's take a look at the plot for garlic versus TMAO, as shown here, with TMAO on the Y axis, and now the average daily garlic intake that corresponds to each one of these blood tests on the X. So first, we can see that significant inverse correlation, so higher levels of garlic correlate with lower levels of TMAO. So if we're going to extrapolate based on that trend line to reach that two micromolar target, or lower, we can see that I'd have to achieve or predicted I'd have to achieve garlic intake of around 3.5 grams per day. So my aim higher for test number 22. Test number 21 was taken at the end of October. Test number 22 was taken in December, late December. And there was 60 days in between. And my average garlic intake over that 60-day period was 2.9 grams per day. So granted, not as high as 3.5 grams per day. But if we take a look at the plot, we can see that I don't have any data within that range, 2.7 to about 3.5 grams of garlic per day. So at worst, it'll help fill in the plot to see if this is a real correlation or not. Now, if 2.9 grams of garlic per day doesn't make a dent on TMAO, its correlation will weaken, and it'll strengthen. And I will continue to follow the top correlations with the goal of keeping TMAO as low as possible and avoiding its age-related increase. Now, it should be mentioned too, that for the seven-day period before testing, I actually averaged a lot more garlic, 5.7 grams per day. So whether it takes 60 days of eating 2.9 grams per day, or only seven days of eating 5.7 grams per day, we'll find out for test number 22. Did it work? When I sent that test for analysis, and that was for a December 26th, test date, 2025. And it takes about a month for those results to come in, which are then posted first on Patreon. So if you're interested in that, check it out. If you've ever wondered what's optimal for biomarkers, well, I have a new Patreon tier dedicated specifically to that. Currently includes these 35 biomarkers shown here, more than two hours of video content, 52 published references. And these aren't the reference ranges, which you can get from any LLM these days. This is what may be optimal based on how each of these biomarkers changes during aging and the association with all-cause mortality risk in the largest studies that exist. So if you're interested in that, check it out. I've also got merch, including Data is My Superpower, which is what I've got on here. Figuring stuff out is my drug, and the Conquer Aging or Dieting logo as shown there. Link in the video description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.