Hey everyone. Today's guests are Modar Kasan, Amar Abidi, and Juliana Rosenbloom, who come to us today from the College of Dental Medicine at Lincoln Memorial University. Dr. Kasan is the chair of the Biomedical Science Department and is an associate professor of Biomedical Sciences. Dr. Abidi is the Associate Dean for Research and the Director of the Center for Research Education and Technology, and Juliana is a candidate in the Doctor of Dental Medicine, sorry, Dental Medicine program. Together, they recently published a paper entitled Unraveling the Oral Microbiome's Role in Alzheimer's Disease, and today we'll present data from the paper followed by Q&A. So with that, welcome everyone, and let's get into the presentation. Good morning. First of all, I'd like to thank you, Michael, uh, for having us and giving us the opportunity to come and present what we've been working on for so long. As you mentioned, my name is Juliana Rosenbloom, and I'm actually a second-year dental student here at Lincoln Memorial College of Dental Medicine in Knoxville, Tennessee. And you both now know my mentors, Dr. Abidi and Dr. Kasan. So I'm just going to get right into it. So, a little bit of background regarding what sparked my initial interest in this project. Before dental school, I received a master's degree in biomedical sciences with a concentration in neuroscience. And I was simultaneously working in a neurobehavior and neurology lab at the Veterans Affairs Hospital in New Jersey. So, I had a little bit of a background both in neuroscience and research. And then when I arrived at Lincoln Memorial, part of me really did not want to give up my passion for neuroscience, despite my clear interest and passion about dentistry. So, that's when I approached Dr. Kasan and Dr. Abidi, and we brainstormed kind of a good way to combine the two, so I can I would be able to pursue both. And I understand that's a very niche concept, but we did it. Um, I have a history of Alzheimer's and dementia in my family, so picking that as the our disease of interest was definitely a no-brainer. Pun intended, you know, if you will. And then after months of hard work and collaboration, we were finally able to, uh, as you mentioned, publish this manuscript into a prestigious journal this past December. Which is very exciting. It's in the Alzheimer's and Dementia, uh, Journal of Alzheimer's Association. And now I get to share our findings and some of the new novel relationships with you. So, as I introduced, we know why I hold Alzheimer's disease so close to my heart, but why is that important to everybody else? So, Alzheimer's disease is the most common form of, um, dementia under just a bigger umbrella. And it's categorized by memory loss, behavioral changes, and cognitive decline. From data obtained as of 2025, from the Journal of Alzheimer's and Dementia, a total of 7.2 million people in the United States aged 65 and older are living with Alzheimer's disease. So if we look at this chart here, we can see that that disease risk increases as age increases. So at 65 to 74 years, we get 1.9 million going all the way up to 85 plus years old at 2.5 million. Now, globally, according to Alzheimer's Disease International, from a study taken in 2020, approximately 55 million people are living with Alzheimer's disease, with that number expecting to triple by 2050. So what does that tell us? Alzheimer's is not a new disease. In fact, there are medications on the market already that are advertised to these patients that are living with this disease. But the key distinction here, and the point comes to being, is that these medications are palliative, not curative. So why don't we look at a different approach to the disease and introduce the possibility that the underlying mechanism behind Alzheimer's may be something different than what's already studied. So here's where we introduce the concept of bacterial distribution and impact. It's no secret that microbes are everywhere. And as we can see based on this figure, there are different percentages of bacterial presence based on where you are in the body. But one thing I'd like to bring to your attention here is the highest distributions being within the mouth and the GI tract. 26% and 30% respectively. Now, the similarity in these numbers might not be shocking per se. I mean, let's think about it. We ingest bacteria every day. We eat something, we drink something, we breathe. The oral cavity is a straight shot down to the gut, which of course, has its own bacterial makeup. That seems reasonable for those two to be pathogenic targets. However, only within the past 10 years, give or take, researchers are becoming a lot more open to the idea that microbiome alterations are the ones that contribute to Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis. So let's take a look at this. If we do a PubMed search, we can see that there are approximately 2015 records linking microbiota and Alzheimer's disease in the gut. If we search through the records linking oral microbiota and Alzheimer's, we only find approximately 240 research records. Like I mentioned earlier, these studies are fairly recent. So in 2013 is when the first contextual review of the gut microbiota and Alzheimer's disease was published. And in 2017, the first major experimental animal model was presented. That seems pretty cool. Only four years it took to to reveal that. Now, in 2002, the first contextual review was published linking oral bacteria to Alzheimer's disease. And that's very interesting, because only in 2019, approximately 20 years later, the first major experimental animal model had been presented linking the two. That's a big difference. So here's where we as a group landed. No one's going to possibly argue that the gut microbiome isn't important, isn't relevant, isn't useful to study. But if we think strictly from a visual point of view, the oral cavity is much closer to the brain. The bacteria are ingested through the mouth, right? So why don't we target the actual source, which is the mouth? So as I mentioned earlier, the oral nasosinus is the closest microbial reservoir to the brain. Some bacteria easily cross the blood-brain barrier and then enter the bloodstream. And the distance to do that from the mouth is much closer than the distance and processes traveled from the gut. The bacteria causing periodontal disease, for example, a disease that causes persistent low-grade inflammation, causes an increase in inflammatory cytokines, and that has an established contribution to Alzheimer's disease pathology. But despite all of these concepts, the oral gut-brain axis still remains very underexplored. So, am I suggesting that just swallowing and drinking your water immediately causes entrance of inflammatory bacteria? Obviously not. The oral cavity is a complex and diverse microbial ecosystem. Like any ecosystem, in order to function, balance is the key here. Under normal circumstances, commensal bacteria, or the beneficial microbes, live in harmony with pathogenic bacteria, or disease-inducing bacteria. And just a note here, recently, uh, pathogenic bacteria have been reclassified as pathobioes. But for the purposes of this presentation and just for consistency's sake, I will continue to refer to them as pathogenic bacteria. So what happens when there's a decrease in the commensal bacteria and an increase in pathogenic bacteria? This is what I'm going to be referring to as dysbiosis, oral dysbiosis from now on. This is what leads to the chronic release of inflammatory cytokines, leading to neuronal death and injury. And the mechanism is simple. Periodontal inflammation releases cytokines. These products enter the systemic circulation, and blood-brain barrier integrity is compromised, and neuroinflammation and neuronal injury occur. Two very well-established contributors to Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis. Do we have any existing studies that prove this concept? Yes. Well, so what did they find? In 2023, a group published a systematic review providing an overview of some of the examples of known commensal bacteria, as Salivarius, Neisseria, and Gemella. And also some examples of pathogenic bacteria, P. gingivalis, T. denticola, F. nucleatum, and AA. Some of which have been found in, uh, brains of postmortem Alzheimer's patients, in the plaques more specifically. Some of which have been found in saliva or gingival curricular fluid. And these this was taken as a combination from various studies. So what do we know about the effects of a decrease in commensal bacteria in general? Collectively, these bacteria are known to be anti-inflammatory. And a decrease in them will disrupt microbial balance, reduce the production of neuroprotective metabolites, and lead to neuronal death and contribute to a decrease in cognition. Increase in pathogenic bacteria, which are known to release pro-inflammatory mediators, will trigger systemic inflammation, promote blood-brain barrier disruption, induce microglial activation, and cause amyloid-beta accumulation. Of course, comes neuroinflammation, neuronal apoptosis, all of which are associated with Alzheimer's disease pathology. Now, this particular review only accounted for Alzheimer's disease patients alone. And that's, of course, interesting and novel, but we wanted to add an extra layer to that. What about the presence of comorbidities? There are well-established bacterial alterations in several systemic diseases, hypertension, chronic kidney disease, type 2 diabetes, just to name a few. And taking a look at those individually, we thought, can we find any overlapping changes in bacteria? So let's look at hypertension first. Across several studies we looked at, we found that the following commensals were increased. I mean, the following commensals were decreased, sorry, and the pathogens increased. The side effects of hypertension and mechanisms are well-established, and with my previous definition of those commensals and pathogenic bacteria, these side effects make sense. But guess what? If those bacteria seem familiar, we actually see these exact same changes in bacteria appear in Alzheimer's disease from saliva samples, with similar side effects, meaning an increase in disease propagation. Let's take a look at chronic kidney disease. Again, across several studies, we found a pattern taken from saliva or gingival crevicular fluid, etc. Um, we see a pattern of increase and decrease in the bacteria that you can see on the screen. And in the context of chronic kidney disease, these bacteria affect nitrate cycling and increase vascular dysfunction. And once again, these are the same bacteria that we're seeing affects in Alzheimer's disease. Not only this, but the low nitric oxide availability from chronic kidney disease leads to reduced cerebral flow, meaning decreased oxygen and nutrient delivery to the brain. And oxidative stress is known to damage neurons. These factors increase amyloid-beta deposition, which is a hallmark of Alzheimer's pathology. Finally, let's take a look at type 2 diabetes. Amongst the available published data, we noticed an increase and decrease in the following bacteria, again taken from brains, saliva samples, GCF. This causes an alteration in gut microbial metabolites, so lipopolysaccharides, short-chain fatty acids, and promote systemic inflammation and activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathways in the liver. This chronic activation contributes to hepatic insulin resistance and increases, once again, inflammatory cytokines. No surprise here. We see the exact same trend with the bacteria in Alzheimer's disease, again taken from the wide variety of samples that I mentioned. And I'm sure you've been overwhelmed with the amount of bacteria and the names that I've been throwing at you and that you're looking at on the screen and your disease. So for your convenience, I have tabulated the the bacteria that actually appeared to overlap not only individually, but across all the systemic diseases that I mentioned. PD standing for periodontal disease, T T2D standing for type 2 diabetes, HT hypertension, CKD chronic kidney disease. Interestingly enough, the same trends of increased or decrease that we see in each of these bacteria are the same are the same ones that we see in the disease and in the in in Alzheimer's disease and in the systemic disease. So this chart alone can reinforce our theory that these bacterial changes influence and potentially also reinforce neuronal destruction and disease pathogenesis, of course, in theory. There's a lot we still don't know. While the conclusions that we've drawn are promising, the question in the forefront is definitely, is this correlation alone or is this causation? The next paper that we're working on explores the specific mechanisms of action of each of the individual bacteria and their impact on both systemic disease and Alzheimer's disease. So we also need to pick particular microbes that we're interested in targeting, out of all the ones that I mentioned, and then eventually the long-term outcomes of interventions and what they would look like for human studies. But conceptually, these answers can be, uh, answer these questions, rather, can be answered using a predictive model. And saliva and gingival curricular fluid are excellent non-invasive options to identify microbial signatures and associate them as disease predictors. And as a dental student, this data offers promise to me as a future dental professional, and my colleagues, that we may play a pivotal role in disease detection. But what can we do for now? For now, we can focus on maintaining periodontal care, taking the proper pro and prebiotics to maintain that long-term desired harmony, and of course, management of already diagnosed systemic disease, because at the end of the day, the goal is always to restore microbial balance and reduce inflammation. Regardless of the gaps in our research, restoring oral symbiosis is imperative to stop inflammation and proliferation of all of the diseases that I mentioned. Looking in the future, we hope to publish our next paper relating mechanisms of each of these bacteria. Um, one particular advantage that we have as an academic institution is, uh, the establishment of our dental clinic, and that gives us access to a very wide patient population. Eventually, we would hope to be able to analyze our own samples from GCF and saliva in hopes of being able to finally prove not only the correlation, but actual causation. And of course, you can never do anything without a village. So this these are all of our collaborators that we've worked with. Um, obviously here we are we're here at Lincoln Memorial University, and we have collaborators at the um University of Tennessee and West Coast University. So we were really lucky that we get to share all of this with you. So thank you so much. Thanks, Juliana. That was great. Uh, if you could take it off full screen and then if you guys are ready for questions, I have a whole bunch of questions. So to the idea of cause versus consequence. So for all of the comorbidities that you mentioned, uh, it's likely that there's poor metabolic health in conjunction with periodontitis. I'm not sure if you could or or is it So I can see you're going both ways where someone's got periodontitis, oral inflammation, and then that translocates systemically to negatively impact some of the comorbidities you mentioned, but also the comorbidities negatively impact the salivary metabolome, which act as a prebiotic negatively for for the growth of some of those pathogenic bacteria. So how how can we get closer to is this a periodontitis story or is this the combination of periodontitis plus just poor health in general leading to the poor health of the oral oral oral cavity? Right. So that is a good question and of course that kind of, um, gives a little bit of a what came first, the chicken or the egg type of deal. First of all, we would have to look at the age population. A lot of the time, age plays a huge factor into, uh, different, um, oral microbiome profiles in general. So, let's say already, um, somebody with hypertension or chronic kidney disease or type 2 diabetes who doesn't have a they don't necessarily need to have an Alzheimer's diagnosis, but they are older and our, um, oral microbiome changes as we get older, especially with medications that we're taking and that causes xerostomia, like dry mouth or, um, increases increases susceptibility to carries, things like that. So maybe that's the start and those are the changes that we're that are propagating perhaps systemic disease. Um, you know, that's a huge age, I would say, plays a huge factor into that. And I don't know how you guys So, so that so if age is the factor underlying all of the comorbidities and that creates a systemic milieu that then ends up in saliva as the prebiotic for, you know, the growth of the periodontitis-associated bacteria, which can then end up in the brain, um, so what's the is the best strategy treating the comorbidities and treating overall systemic health and improving fitness and resilience, like is that is that the goal? Uh, so I would like to go, uh, uh, back to the previous question you asked. Uh, of course there are comorbidities, uh, and oral, uh, oral health, they are connected to each other. However, I would like to mention a study that was done last year, uh, in Wuhan in China, where they measure the bacteria profile in saliva from patients with Alzheimer's disease. These patients, they don't have any comorbidities. Only they suffer from Alzheimer's disease. And they were able to show that, uh, they have the same trend that we show, like, uh, the bacteria, the bad bacteria that they are increasing with Alzheimer's disease and the beneficial bacteria are decreasing with Alzheimer's disease. Uh, now what I want to say is comorbidities, of course, it can affect, maybe it can bypass, uh, the oral health. But, of course, it's bidirectional. So if you have oral health disease, this can lead, for example, to hypertension, it can lead to diabetes. Also, hypertension and, uh, diabetes itself, they can lead to what, they can lead to, uh, oral health, uh, issues. Uh, so, in order to like, just separate between both, in human is difficult, because you cannot manipulate, like, for ethical reasons, you can manipulate you cannot manipulate it in human. However, what we can do, like, mean we have options in animals, we can use the germ-free mice. And what we can do, we can, uh, populate like the oral health with the bacteria that we just mentioned in this paper. And this our future direction, this what we are doing in collaboration with, uh, a Pittsburgh University. And what we want to do is, first, we want to try to see how this change in the oral bacteria, independently of comorbidities, can lead to Alzheimer's disease. So the best model to use is germ-free mice. And then we will add one layer of complexity to it where we will add, like, for example, hypertensive mice, diabetic mice, chronic disease mice, etcetera. I guess this might give us an answer, uh, and but still, it's difficult as Juliana said, who come first, the chicken or the egg? Yeah. So what's the what's the prebiotic for, uh, P. gingivalis, Treponema, and, uh, well, I forgot Ten, I think Tannerella, maybe. What was that? What was the third one? T. denticola. T. Treponema denticola. Yeah. What's the prebiotic for their growth in the in the mouth? Uh, you mean, what they they feed, uh, mainly they feed on on sugar. In order to, Yeah, in order to grow. So then that wouldn't that suggest that considering that saliva should be proportionally the same, have the same concentration, what's in saliva should be in the same proportional concentration to blood. If someone's, uh, diabetic or pre-diabetic and have relatively high blood levels of blood sugar, that would be in saliva. And now we've got an increased prevalence and growth of these bacteria in the mouth. And then that's going to maybe contribute to, you know, oral inflammation. So is this a high blood sugar, uh, story? It can be high blood sugar story, because it's very well known that during type 2 diabetes, uh, we can you can find a lot of glucose in, uh, in in saliva. And by having a lot of glucose and saliva, uh, this will lead to reduction in water in saliva. So we are reducing the saliva amount, and definitely this will shift the pH in the oral cavity and will create an ideal environment for bad bacteria to, uh, to grow there. So yeah, it can play it can play an important, uh, an important role in growing, uh, bad bacteria. Also, it's very well known that, uh, bacteria, they feed on sugar and they release acids as metabolite. And if you expose teeth to, uh, to acid for a long time, you'll end up having like holes in your teeth and it will affect your gum. And this eventually will lead to an increase of bad bacteria as well. So it sounds like, uh, optimizing metabolic health, keeping blood glucose levels, avoiding that age-related increase, which is a challenge because glucose levels increase during aging. So it seems like periodontitis and then correspondingly having bacterial translocation from the oral to the brain, oral cavity to the brain, is almost inevitable, or is it is it not inevitable? One could argue that it is inevitable. That's something that people like to say, but I would like to make another point is that as somebody too who feared the dentist for majority of my life, um, and then ironically decided to become one, um, I think also one of the keys is maybe it's not inevitable. Maybe if we look at, um, some research papers that exist, a lot of them are, um, from overseas, but if we look at those papers, a lot of people are not going to schedule dentist appointments. They don't want to see their dentist, they don't think it's important. Um, you know, some people just don't take care of their teeth until it becomes an aesthetic issue. And nobody really goes to their general doctor for a checkup and, you know, asks them to see what bacteria, can you take a swab of my saliva and tell me what bacteria are changing in my microbiome, you know what I mean? So nobody really does that. So maybe if we took care of our teeth, maybe if periodontal disease in general was decreased, maybe that would that would make it inevitable, but and aging maybe wouldn't be a factor. But, um, you know, though that's all up for So I see. So when considering that it's probably bidirectional, if people are optimizing oral health, independent of age-related changes to blood glucose, at least that should reduce the risk of having poor oral health and having those bacteria translocate into the brain. Right. And even in in the context of Alzheimer's disease, um, we don't see they research shows that the disease progression begins 20 years before you even begin to see symptoms or actually get a diagnosis. So if I'm at 20 years old, or I'm 26 years old, chances are, I'm not going to my doctor and getting a neuro scan and see and finding plaques and tangles in my brain. But maybe the bacteria is coagulating and developing there and I just don't know about it yet. Yeah, definitely. So, in terms of, um, optimizing the oral cavity, so we hear about obviously toothbrushing and flossing, like this seems to be the obvious. But I think an an underrated, a grossly underrated approach is interdental flossing, right? So the the analogy that I like to make is, sure, you can brush your teeth and flossing kind of just scrapes a little bit on the sides, but, you know, that's like without having the inter interdental brush, it's kind of like washing the front of your house and kind of ignoring the sides. And then the stuff can accumulate, you know, stuff, you know, debris and and sugars and whatever else. And then that can be a a trigger for, you know, gum inflammation, leading to periodontitis. So is the optimal oral health not just going to the dentist clearly a couple times a year to get a cleaning to scrape off the plaque, but toothbrushing plus flossing, plus interdental brushing, and then maybe even getting a, uh, they have specific like perio brushes where you could kind of jam it into your gums and kind of just dig it dig in there, like usually when people go to the dentist, you know, the the dentist will say, don't dig into your gums, you're going to have gum recession. But the other side of that is if you don't actively try to clean your gums or get in there, stuff will accumulate. So is it the combination of all four of those or what would you say is the best approach for optimizing oral care, independent of going to the dentist a couple times per year? Juliana, I'll let you speak first. I'll speak afterwards. There's a few other things I want to mention also from the like the previous conversations I want to build into it. So I want to our dental student and too, I'm acknowledge first. So. Oh, thanks. Um, I I think that is also good question, but also there's a lot of, um, I would say lack, there's a lack of knowledge of exactly how to brush. Some people there's people think that they're just going to take their toothbrush and put a glob of toothpaste on it and then just hold it there and that's somehow going to fix everything. Other people take it to the exact opposite extreme where they're just standing there and brushing and taking sandpaper basically to their teeth, that that's also not great. But again, that that still comes down to, um, going to see your going to see a professional and not just relying on your own magic potions that you've come up with, you know, or or solutions that you've come up with. You actually have to go and see a provider to give you the a hygienist, a dentist, who's going to actually give you the proper tools, tell you to use soft-bristle toothbrushes so that you don't get like you're saying, recession. Uh, telling you exactly in which direction, how long in each quadrant to brush for, things like that. This is not something that you're just going to know intuitively. This is going to come from actual visits to a provider. Yeah. But wait. Hang on. Amar. So, hang on. So, in terms of flossing, whether it's water pick or, you know, a wax string floss, interdental brushing. Are you suggesting you don't need a perio brush if you don't have periodontitis to kind of dig into the gums to get stuff out? Definitely not suggesting that, because flossing and taking care of your gums is obviously incredibly important. There are actually, um, we just got back from a, uh, symposium in Memphis where, uh, some of the students were presenting different research regarding different types of floss and the efficacy and, um, of wax floss versus, um, there's like new string kind of floss and things. I again, that's more of a personal preference. There is, I just think it all like I'm saying goes back to education because again, if we're going to argue that inflammation is the driver of all of these things. If you're in there with a perio brush, you know, scraping your gums, you're going to inflame your gums one way or the other and still the pro-inflammatory cytokines are the cascade is still going to go. So, I think the key is correctly flossing, using perio brushes, using a water pick, everything needs to be done correctly. Okay. Amar. Yes. No, I was going to go one step back. So I'm going to tell you some clinical practices. So, then move into the oral hygiene concepts here. One of the things I wanted to mention to you is, um, you were mentioning about like the niche is a diabetes, is it what direction are we having? So, one of the things I want to express is, if you go to the general, um, endocrinologist right now, the way they study in their practice, whenever their A1C is not under control, one of the things they actually examine these days is to send this patient for oral hygiene check, because there's enough evidence now clinically present that we actually are reducing A1C levels for people who actually have good oral health. All right. So there's a you can look this up, it's available online. Um, other norm that is available is from like rheumatic disease. So you go to rheumatologist, uh, a lot of them are giving medications and they can't control them. They figure it out that either removing their teeth per se, because that was the conduit there, or basically cleaning them up, getting them in good oral hygiene perspective, and eventually the inflammation to be reduced because of the localized bacterial population. We're able to actually also see that these medications now work better for these patients and they don't have as much flare-ups. So many of the, uh, rheumatologists will send them. And there's more probably to the area, but I'm just telling you these are common practices happening clinically now that actually do appropriate that. Now, coming to the oral, um, oral hygiene, she hit the spot, because technically, the biggest issue we have is the education and compliance, right? People don't know really how to brush their teeth. They assume a parameter. Um, and then taking, for instance, um, a, um, floss or even a toothpick or something and wedging it in there, it's actually traumatic to the mouth, right? So there's techniques to it. So when you're doing all these pieces and everyone says, oh, logically it makes sense for me to just go there. But imagine this, if you're already having inflamed gums, right? And you're you have these fenestrated blood vessels existing there, which are already a gateway for potential bacterial, uh, products to get through. When you wedge it through, you may traumatize more. So it depends on the individual itself. So there's like pieces so what are you doing in terms of what it's needed? Holistically speaking at the final end, that's why it's so important, because as you were mentioning before about how the bacterial plaque develops in the you know, the food and all that's there. Body actually does a unique piece there. I just want to give you a quick update on that, because you'll find it fascinating. I find it fascinating even till this day. Is, um, just like you have calcifications in the body, because the body's trying to or mineralization to protect itself. The mouth does the same thing. So when you actually have increased, uh, plaque buildup, different species, microbial species there. What with the saliva's help, with the body's response, we actually calcify it, or, you know, that's what we call tartar or calculus. Uh, what ends up with that is, with the the irony switches, it kills some of the bacteria, but the bacteria we're concerned more about is the one that's already embedded down in sorry, in the sulcus, right? So there is like pieces like that in Japan happening. And that's some of the bacteria that we're kind of discussing right now, uh, which is part of that. So I just wanted to make that part there. At the end, the under player becomes truly inflammation. So which direction does the inflammation travel? Right? Is it subclinical always coming from the mouth or and which can lead to all these after-effects, or is it other problems like sugar that we introduce too much, which leads to that issue altogether? And a lack potentially of oral prebiotics, say for example, like nitrate, which can stimulate the growth of some of the bacteria you mentioned, like Neisseria and others, right? So, all right, so staying on the idea of optimizing oral health, um, so I get that potentially you can make things worse if you're just jamming stuff into your gums and and into your teeth, but the other side of that is, and I say this anecdotally, I don't know if this translates to others. I neglected, you know, using a perio brush for a long time. And I'd go to the dentist, you know, flossing every day and brushing every day for years, and I would have bleeding upon probing. So, I was like, what's going on here? Right? So once I got a perio brush and I started to actually get in there, problem solved, no more no more gum bleeding at home, no more gum bleeding, no matter how much they're digging into my gums when I go to the dentist. So I I guess what you're saying, there's some nuance there if your gums are healthy and you're jamming them and now they're bleeding, probably should stop doing that. On the other side, if you're not in there at all, trying to clean it out, you may have the, you know, the the the stimulus for the gum gum inflammation, gingivitis, at least, which could end up becoming periodontitis, which leads to translocation and all that, right? So I guess there's nuances what you guys are saying to optimizing oral health. Correct. And and and to the point, what you just said, there is nuances, there are genetic factors, there is age-related events where you actually have senescing of cells going on and things of that sort. So the optimization responses are not there. But you're on the money and Jill also picked up on this part, that you you there is a technique and sensitivity how you do these things. And you can mean our objective here is to be preventive, right? And so some things are going to happen, we have the story that's telling that there are players involved that lead to this disease potentially, right? Like you're exacerbating conditions, which lead to potentially other problems emergence. So that's where the whole thing is. So by the mouth being regulated that way, we can actually significantly, uh, based on the studies that we have seen, uh, and what we are starting to see as practices and clinical sides correlating with with dentistry, that's what we're trying to see. We're we're seeing as a better management profile, which is part of the whole concept of this manuscript. Also, I would I would like to add, like, uh, brushing your teeth and flossing is very important. But, uh, if we add to it the comorbidities, like, for example, if you have hypertension or diabetes, uh, then you have like an increase of, uh, reactive oxygen species that they can affect, uh, the vessels in your gums, they can affect your gum itself and it will lead to gingival inflammation independently if you're flossing or brushing your teeth. So I feel one of the best way to treat it is to maintain a balanced oral microbiome by maintaining the bacteria that they have anti-inflammatory effect. And this can be achieved by using probiotic or, uh, prebiotics. All right, wait, before going to pro or prebiotics, just staying on that idea of optimizing oral health. So, uh, non-alcohol-based mouthwash, which seems like the easiest low-hanging fruit. Obviously, nobody should be using alcohol in their mouthwash. We we've seen the effects they can do to blood pressure and it's potential links with AD. So, what is the optimal way, like is water, so the oral cavity, uh, pH is, uh, saliva is, uh, 7.4, some something around there, right? So we want it to be more alkaline, and obviously not acidic, right? So that that the beginning of the the gut, being the mouth, more alkaline. But as we go all the way down to the colon, it's the opposite. We want it to be more acidic and not alkaline as it becomes more alkaline during aging. So optimizing the gut, fiber, short-chain fatty acids that acidifies the colon. So, what's the other side of that story? What's the best way to keep oral pH around 7.4? Obviously not I should are you going to say a high sugar diet is going to make it more acidic? Okay, that's the obvious. But is there such a thing too as too alkaline? Like if I put sodium bicarbonate in a homemade mouth solution, you know, 1% sodium bicarbonate, which is close to physiological saline, uh, concentration. Is that going to over alkalize, you know, with a pH of eight, you know? So or is just water rinsing with water and then flossing after eating? Like what's the what's the best quote unquote mouthwash, uh, after eating? You know. I I think Yeah, go that go that go that I'll go ahead for a sec. I I'll speak at the end. Interestingly enough, um, there's a big, there's a big argument, I think, to be made that, um, actually mouthwash might not even be a real solution, I guess. Because even toothpaste alone gets advertised as this amazing thing that's going to care take away all of the bugs and no more carries and cavities for you. But it's actually, unfortunately not really true. And it's actually the mechanical, um, act of using your toothbrush that is what is removing these bacteria, not whatever is in your toothpaste or in your mouthwash or anything along those lines. So just from a personal standpoint, I believe that just the idea of a mouthwash and using that as your way to regulate pH in that regard isn't necessarily the one-stop shop solution. It's more mechanically actually using your toothbrush, regardless of what you put on it. It's just the mechanism of actually using it. So after eating, no matter what concentration of, uh, acids or bases are in the foods that you're eating, to just to to brush, not not to try to regulate pH with water or sodium bicarbonate or anything other than that. Right. That's a personal take and I would argue that a lot some other professionals have different opinions and I'm sure Dr. Abidi and Dr. Kasan will weigh in, but personally I that is what I think it's more of a mechanical issue than it is, uh, a balancing bicarb or water or anything like that. Thoughts, Modar? Amar? I feel rinsing with water is a key. It's very important to rinse with water after after eating, because, uh, rinsing with water will also especially if you are eating a lot of snacks, rinsing with water will minimize, uh, it will dilute the sugar in, uh, in your mouth. And definitely, as we just mentioned, uh, like sugar, it's the food for the bad bacteria that they rely on. So no need to go to the alkalization with sodium bicarbonate or anything that's got a relatively higher pH than that. Maybe Amar can answer this question. So you could see the thing is this, uh, Michael, I'm going to go because it's a your question is very straightfor but it's multifaceted, right? Because when you're asking about a day-to-day condition of like what Juliana said, hey, we, if you just do mechanical brushing of teeth, we can get rid of the bacteria, which may be uh, populating. Now that there is a significant piece of that too, because generally in animal studies that they have done about the plaque formation, it takes about 24 hours to 48 hours in animals, to actually produce a proper like uh, plaque to actually cause some kind of gingivitis to form, right? And the question comes to being is does that mean after each meal, I want to do this? And my argument or regulation would be, as you age, you maybe want to be a little more meticulous. Just just saying for the sake of. Uh, but on the other piece of that, do you have to, probably not. Uh, water is essential because of other reasons too. Because the the dehydration concept requires it. And if you and then one of the other pieces that we're not to it, because if you are talking about, because saliva is formed by the ductal cells coming through the blood, right? And the reality still comes to being is how well you maintain and regulate your blood in terms of pH, which is kind of regulated, but their diets matter, uh, what you eat and how much you eat. Like, I mean, I come from a background of Pakistani and Indian food, we have natural spices, they're more oil concepts there. It's probably much better for us to drink more water associated and and also make sure that things are there. Um, having alkalinity or something of mouthwash and so on for localized events when you're seeing that I ate too much spicy food, there's nothing wrong with doing that. It's just not because then you're just ingesting a lot of it too. And at what point did you cause yourself perturbance to the gut? Because the gut needs its own form. So there is there's pieces like that, like when you drink carbonated water with the sparkling waters these days, right? Or when you go with these alkaline waters and it's good for you. It's good for people depending on the condition given. And over-using and a continuous use will cause other aftermath because we get stuck with here, but the body is still one big piece. So, but in localized events to the point, water we on the day-to-day will be essential. If a person is feels like their food gets hung up in areas around which are of concern, I would tell them to brush, um, after meals as well. So that that would be the best way to to reduce the opportunity of things just sitting there. So, fantastic. All right. So, brushing and maybe water. Okay. So, in terms of prebiotics for the oral cavity, knowing that sugar, uh, obviously, you know, direct intake of sugar, but then also high blood sugar is going to be a stimulus for the bad stuff in the mouth. And then knowing that nitrate-containing foods, whether it's beets or green leafy vegetables, are going to be a fantastic prebiotic for the growth of the quote-unquote good guys. Are there other prebiotics that are important for shifting the balance from, you know, the commensals to the to the pathobionts and and vice versa, you know, optimizing the oral microbiome with prebiotics? So, I would like to talk about a prebiotic that, uh, we made in collaboration with McGill University, and it's patented now. Uh, so what we did, without entering into a lot of details, that what we did, we tweaked the glycosidic bond in it, and we noticed that, uh, this, uh, prebiotic was able to shift the oral bacteria towards the commensal bacteria, so towards the, uh, uh, the good bacteria. So, it depends what type of sugar, uh, you are, uh, you are using. So, uh, we did the study in, uh, with Amar and we hope to publish it this year. We noticed that when we give this, uh, uh, prebiotic to hypertensive mice, even for obese and diabetic mice, we were able to shift the bacteria towards the in the oral health and in the gut towards the beneficial, uh, beneficial bacteria. Uh, but we have to be to be careful what type of prebiotic we are using, because and without mentioning names, there is a prebiotic that it's over the counter, and we noticed that when you use it, it will it will improve the gut microbiota somehow, but it will shift the oral bacteria towards the pathogenic bacteria. Yeah. So, which are there oral are there prebiotics specific for the oral cavity that don't necessarily get to the gut? They are not specific for oral. They go they go to the gut. So it sounds like in order to optimize the oral microbiome, we need to optimize systemic health with a variety of nutrients that could, like, for example, nitrate, that would then end up in the mouth to act as a prebiotic rather than taking like a lozenge specific for the oral microbiome, because then that might not actually work to optimize oral microbiome and it may mess up the gut microbiome, which is going to end up messing up the oral microbiome. Yes. There is one second. Just want to say one piece and I'll take it. There are, um, in terms of, um, dental realm, there are there's a company called pro, uh, pro oral health. They actually have oral, uh, pre, uh, excuse me, not prebiotics, they're probiotics. Um, I don't recall all their names, but I know that one of them is Streptococcus oralis. Um, and there's one more in there. The idea of behind all of that is, because microbiome has to have certain, uh, bacteria come together before others can kind of jump in. They have changed the midpoints, the intermediate bacteria, to which compete for this, uh, site. So they were trying to reduce the burden of, uh, of these pathogenic bacteria altogether by changing the intermediate specie. So there is that concept there. So that kind of gets to the idea of the oral microbiome in terms of who's there, and then the oral metabolome, as in what's what they're actually doing, right? So, uh, I think a lot of the so, you know, the studies can contradict in terms of who's there and then whether it's a commensal or not under certain conditions. And then even in the gut, it's like, you know, the the there'll be functional potential based on the 16S, the you know, the genetics of it. But then when you do the metabolomic data, whether it's fecal or blood, that doesn't necessarily agree with who's there, right? So, what are your thoughts on oral metabolome-based studies to identify you guys mentioned some of them in the paper, like gingipains. But this is one example. I'm sure that there's a a variety of oral metabolites, um, you know, just indicating, which is more a reflection of the groups rather than the single species or a few species approach, to identify dysbiotic versus, um, healthy. So, what are what are your thoughts on the oral metabolome versus the oral microbiome? So definitely, the bacteria itself can I mean, if it's increasing and decreasing without changes in, uh, metabolites, it will not lead to to any effect. So, at the end of the day, what counts is the metabolites released from these bacteria, whether they are good bacteria or, uh, or bad bacteria. Uh, you just give give an example about the given example about gingipains that it's released there. There's also LPS, there is cytokines such as IL-6 and IL-12 that they are all very well known to be released from bad bacteria in the oral health. But what is the problem here? Also, independently of gingipains, there are like LPS and cytokines, they can also be released by the gut microbiota into into the circulation. And this again will put you in this dilemma. Are these metabolites coming from the oral bacteria or from the gut bacteria? And again, I'll go back to the same idea. I feel that the best way to approach it and to answer this question is to use germ-free mice. Where we can inoculate like bacteria directly in the oral health or just in the gut. And this will this will help you to to know even better if these metabolites are coming strictly from the oral microbiota or from the gut microbiota or from both. All right. So, along those lines and people are going to say it's disgusting, you know, but fecal transplants are can improve health in various conditions, whether it's C. difficile infection, uh, but is there is there a role for salivary transplants in improving someone's oral health? Uh, using whether it's germ-free mice or even in clinical studies. Is that a future thing that may end up being a real thing? I I don't see why not, because it's the same concept like, uh, fecal transplant. So, I I I I think it I mean, of course, you need to do additional studies, but I feel, yeah, it can be feasible. Why not? Can be. Might be even easier by taking like a piece of gum rather than a whole, you know, transferring pieces of gum from one person to another in that in that, you know, facility, I guess, if that's what comes to mind. But you'd have to know that they're You'd have to know that they're Yeah, yeah, yeah. Right. Yeah. So, so all right, so going back to metabolites. So, uh, urea, you guys mentioned urea in the paper. And independent of CKD, where blood levels of urea will be elevated and then you'll probably have elevated blood levels of urea in the mouth. But urea, as you guys mentioned in the paper, um, is degraded to ammonia which will then push the pH towards alkaline. So, is that which potentially is good news for the oral microbiome, right? So, within the context of CKD, you'd have high levels of blood urea and then potentially good for the oral microbiome, or am I misinterpreting that? We have to be super careful when we are interpreting data coming to urea, because also what we know that ammonia can cross the blood-brain barrier, it it can go to the brain and there in the brain it can play an important role in increasing edema in the brain. So, uh, everything is to to have a to have a balance. So, so we have to be super careful when we are like analyzing such type of data, especially when it comes to urea. Got it. All right. So then along the lines of balance. So then superficially, most people will say, okay, cut sugar out of your diet, like, no carbs, right? And but that's a broad thing, right? Because is it is your diet rich in monosaccharides? Does is is starch, which is a disaccharide, is that going to impact the gut microbiome the same way as simple sugars like glucose? And then you've got the polysaccharides, the fibers, which are going to impact the gut microbiome and probably impact, uh, the mouth. So, you know, is is the quote unquote optimal diet for gut health, you know, a low, so obviously no processed in an ideal world. No processed foods, no UPFs. But then you could also make the argument that if someone's on a very high carbohydrate-containing diet, if that doesn't optimize insulin sensitivity, that could lead to poor oral health in the long term. So I guess for optimizing oral health, could you make a link between find the diet that optimizes your systemic health, low inflammation, you know, relatively low blood glucose, avoid age-related changes for those biomarkers. And then that will optimize the oral microbiome and it may be different for different people. Maybe some people actually thrive on a quote unquote high carbohydrate, non-UPF-containing diet, where others may thrive on a higher fat. So what are your thoughts on diet in composition of specific macronutrients? And I know this isn't a team, you know, for, uh, dentists, right? But I mean, it's it's a contributor. So what are what are your thoughts on the optimal diet for the oral microbiome? Well, it's it's difficult. This question is is very difficult. Like, I mean, I don't know the exact answer for it, but what I can tell you like, uh, it's very important to, uh, to maintain a balanced diet as well. Uh, you cannot cut down on sugar completely, it's very important to have a little bit of sugar, you know, because we need sugar in order, uh, in order to survive. But also, we have to be super careful like, uh, because when we ingest food, all this food will go to our stomach, to our intestine where the gut bacteria reside there. So, we have to be, uh, very careful, because you don't want to shift the bacteria as the gut bacteria towards the pathogenic bacteria, because this itself, it will increase systemic health. And by increasing systemic health, definitely you're going to affect the oral health, which itself will be shifted towards oral bad bacteria, it will potentiate even more the systemic health. So, it's very it's very difficult. And here I feel like, uh, uh, dentist and nutritionist should be should come together in order to come up with the ideal, uh, nutrition for people that are suffering from Alzheimer's disease. Just a just to push a little bit more on that, could you make the argument that considering that obesity is linked with comorbidities and those comorbidities will likely negatively influence the oral microbiome. And then obviously someone with obesity or being overweight would have an increased likelihood of periodontitis, whether it's over-consumption of calories or too much processed food. Could you make the argument that finding the diet that works at the individual level for optimizing, you know, body composition and fitness to minimize comorbidity risk over the long term could optimize oral microbiome health, oral health. Definitely it could. And there is papers that they show that if you control the gut microbiota and this itself can control the oral microbiota. Actually, we published a paper like, uh, last year, it's related to a gut bacteria called Akkermansia muciniphila. And we showed that this gut bacteria, it's very low when, uh, during obesity and during type 2 diabetes. So if you, uh, if you are able to, uh, shift or to increase this bacteria in the gut, automatically you are improving the oral, uh, the oral microbiome. And we put in the paper like, uh, the mechanism by which this bacteria can improve the oral health, it's by reducing inflammation, because this bacteria Akkermansia is very well known to increase the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10. So yeah, definitely there is evidence we and others already showed that if you are able to control gut microbiota, definitely you will be able to control oral micro positively oral microbiota. Fantastic. All right. Two more questions. So, uh, when considering that gingipains are cysteine proteases, uh, interestingly, I don't know if you guys are familiar with the biomarker, but cystatin C, which is linked with kidney function, right? So high cystatin C, worse kidney function. So cystatin C is a cysteine protease inhibitor, which increases during aging. So now part of that is, it's, uh, poor kidney function will be associated with high levels of cystatin C, but I wonder if the cells that produce cystatin C during aging may be in part because of the age-related changes to the oral cavity, and potentially more, uh, you know, P. gingivalis, potentially more gingipains, uh, more cysteine proteases, uh, that are either in the mouth or that translocate into the blood, and then we respond to that by making more cystatin C as a compensatory response against, you know, having cysteine proteases. So, what what are your thoughts? I don't know if you guys have ever even heard that hypothesis pitched, but possibly plausible? No, I would say it's plausible, because sorry, I'm just taking one second. Just to give you some insight to what you're saying. There is, uh, PAD enzyme found, uh, in terms of, um, P. gingivalis as well. So some of the things that mean, um, also study together. We actually looked at animals with rheumatic disease and we introduced them with periodontal conditions, or periodontal disease in this case, by giving them P. gingivalis. What ends up happening, these specific mice that I'm talking about, uh, which have um an antigen variation if you will. It's like HLA change if you will. They actually develop uh, rheumatic disease. And the reason why they develop rheumatic disease is because these enzymes that are working in the subclinical or going in the blood vessel, they actually change the shape of citrulline, if you will, and causes it to become, uh, an event for like, I don't want to recall exactly the name right now, it'll come to my brain at some point. But that the idea comes to being is they become neoantigens, right? So when they become neoantigens, now your body fights that and those actually go sit down in rheumatic areas, or in this the synovial fluids or whatever you want to call them. So all of a sudden you're having that disease. So we have very well-established periodontal periodontitis association to rheumatic disease in many animal models, exactly to what you're stating. So to say that something like this may be kidney-associated where we're having this issue, is completely within the normal of what could be a possibility. So, fantastic. Yeah, great. All right. So, last question. So, if I know we touched on optimizing oral health, but are are there things that you guys do, the experts, the dental experts, uh, you know, to optimize, attempt to optimize your own oral health every day that maybe, uh, people can learn from? In my obviously vast experience of two years of being a dental student, um, I think I'm trying to get better at it, I'm not going to lie. I don't know if it's working, but my caffeine consumption definitely, definitely trying to cut back on that. Um, just because that's just a acid mouth rinse for 12 hours a day. So Is that coffee? That's coffee. Not tea? Coffee, yeah. No, no, no, coffee, yeah. That's a bad. I'm very big coffee drinker. Coffee has soluble fiber. That's the other side of that equation, which can optimize the gut microbiome. So you may be actually doing some good to come Right. Right. Maybe I just need to brush my teeth after and that's what that is what is that's where it all comes full circle. And you never know that might be the balance. Just need to talk to a nutritionist first. To to make sure that's true. Yeah. I guess brushing your teeth, flossing, uh, cleaning your teeth every six months and eat healthy diet is a key. Cool. Amar. Yeah. So, I I'm on the same page, but remember this. You said something earlier. I want just to bring it the the beauty of the construct that we have here. You were talking about and I want to you to imagine this, with me for one second. So you're you were talking about uh, obesity for instance, or some other issues altogether. When a person starts to take that diet and becomes, let's say, more heavy set, more weight, there is changes physiologically happening for them. By the time they sit in our patient chair, we start to notice specific pieces, right? So a person who actually has more obesity, let's say around the neck and head area, they have more breathing issues. Because now all of a sudden they have a fatter structure that causes them more trouble. They stop breathing through their mouth and start trying to breathe through their uh, excuse me, from the nose, from the mouth more, and all of a sudden you're having more like obstructive areas of airways, right? You can have sleep apnea and other things of that sort happening. If that's happening, you're trying to breathe through your mouth, you're going to make your mouth more dry, right? So your natural fluidics change. And then all of a sudden your person this person else that is having lack of oxygen. If you have lack of oxygen happening, you're have more issues going on with the body where your body's compensating through other means, just just to stay afloat. So that it's it's it's very you can actually imagine some of these things happening and how the body's functioning together. In terms of day-to-day activity of how to maintain things around, um, I would say majority of the dentists that uh, um, you get an um, they do brush their teeth more often, right? They don't they do at least twice a day, but after meals they start to do it as well. Uh, we have access to mouthwash that's not to say that it's definitely improving anything per se, but it does actually give you that consistent moment because it has essential oils that can still function to be appropriate for better smell and potentially for limited uh, views and so on so forth. So Juliana's right, like they the actual studies don't show true true benefit unless you use properly. Majority don't because every study that has been done, you have to swish for at least 30 seconds. And uh, people don't swish for 30 seconds. That's the reality. So it just just part of the and that that's the only evidence-based concept that we have. Like you have to have 30 seconds at least for XYZ and certain, uh, uh, essential oils will work well. So there's several of them that actually work fairly well. Uh, which you can find in Listerine as well. But generally speaking, on the day-to-day, we we talked about drinking water is good, then maintain that. Uh, make sure you're able to remember your habits, right? If you keep your mouth open too long, you're breathing through your mouth a lot, too. So we try to reduce that habit, because that can give you dry mouth in terms of that. But generally, maintaining fluidics in the mouth is very important, because that's the thing that kind of moves everything through for you. So brush your teeth, drink water, uh, be aware of your problems when you eat, where the food gets stuck. So, So hang on. dry mouth, uh, the prevalence, you know, what is it? Zero, zerostomia, I don't know if I'm pronouncing it correct. Yeah, zerostomia. Yeah. Zerostomia. Zerostomia. So that increases during aging. So, are there ways we can improve saliva production during aging to help optimize the oral microbiome? So, there are yeah. Go ahead. Go ahead. The question first, why this increase with aging? It increased with aging because elderly people they suffer from dehydration. So, uh, the best way to do it is to drink a lot of water. So, this is the simplest answer. So, maybe Amar can elaborate more on it. The you're you're 100% right. The baseline is maintain water intake, which is very good for all of us. Uh, there are things that we do and I'm not going to express all the details, but there's new, uh, methodologies from non-conventional Western philosophy where you have massaging of certain areas to actually improve fluidics and so on as well. So those things are being studied just like you were saying about nutrition. I think dentistry needs to be more nutrition-oriented. Uh, we are technically, but we don't teach it enough to actually continue the whole process. We because it's very pertinent for us, because we're talking about all these acids and all the things changing. And we don't, other than the generic concept of avoid sugar, but it has to be a balanced diet. So, there's a principle difference there. Yeah. So. So massaging the salivary glands or is this more of a lymphatic, uh, kind of thing or it's it's both. It's so it's like so right behind the salivary glands and so on, you do have a lymph system going down and across, right? So, um, it is lymph draining. Um, there are some concepts that have been used recently with, um, and I don't want to deviate the subject matter, but there is uh, low light, uh, red light therapy, cold therapy. We call them photobiomodulation. And so that's basically a the best one that I know that works well is about 810-nanometer light, right? Uh, pass far red, just to go around for a few minutes and so on. Actually improves fluidics of the localized areas. So that we do use that in conventional means as well to improve, uh, salivary issues. Interesting. All right. And then also, uh, commercially available oral microbiome for people to measure that on their own. Like should would you guys say that uh, what everyone say that, you know, people should be measuring their own oral microbiome composition and trying to figure out how to optimize it? Or is this something pay no attention to it, just go for regular cleanings? What what would everybody say? I would argue I would make an argument, I think, both ways. That is a very interesting multi-faceted question, because on one hand, I guess, like looping circling back to where we started, right? With, uh, people taking oral health into their own hands and thinking that they just need to scrub and, you know. So, giving giving people access who may not entirely understand the complexity of bacteria and their, uh, metabolic signatures and all of these things, giving people access to that kind of information and having them regulate those things at home might not be the finest idea just because there's a lot of factors and not enough education behind it. On the other hand, yeah, that would be a great idea. If everybody just knew how to, you know, your T. denticola levels are up, so that means you need to cut back on your Coke drinkage this week, you know, something along those lines. It would be easy, it would be nice if it was that simple. I just am not sure if we're going to reach a point, um, where it will be that easy. But in theory, one could argue both ways, I think, of what what the answer would be if like an at-home kind of measurement. I agree with, uh, with Juliana. I feel I I feel the safest way is to brush your teeth, floss, uh, maintain a clinic. Uh, giving them access to control their own oral microbiome, uh, is challenging because of lack of knowledge. And also, I guess it will be, uh, specific for each individual depending of the disease that you have. Like, do you have hypertension, do you have diabetes, do you have kidney disease? So, uh, it it will be challenging. So, uh, I prefer, I mean, it's an amazing idea, but I prefer that they should go through like, uh, a dentist or a physician in order to decide which bacteria they should increase, which bacteria they should, uh, should decrease. We should not give access to the public to control it themselves because of lack of of knowledge. You know, you know, it already exists. There already commercially available kits, companies that use whole genome sequencing to do this stuff. So, uh, I I And I in generally the same pathway with everybody there. Education is the pertinent key here. If if they're if they're knowledgeable enough to be able to manage and so on, they can. The issue is the way we have our system and our healthcare, people just rely on what XYZ said and they're going to follow that trend. And if that's what your reliance is, then you randomly have this moment of saying, hey, I want to just do my own thing. It may not be the best way to process through, because they don't have the educational background, or they never started from that point to say, hey, I'm going to adjust this, change that. Because think about this way, Mike, we have people here in the US who are taking who are type 2 diabetic, and they keep on taking their pill. And they keep on eating their sugar. The the problem has the diet regulation. And so when you see the medications, they keep on adding more and more medication. So the reality still is when I look at the from this angle, I see the general population is not knowledgeable enough to remind themselves to make the adjustments that are needed for them to improve their overall health, therefore their medical professionals are must to be like, they're they're reminders. Hey, you're going in the wrong direction. And so if a person is ambitious enough to be able to do all that, make sure I I think sure, no problem at all. But that's where it comes down to the educational background. So, is a part of that educational process. Could you argue that there is a paucity of case studies and people documenting, you know, testing their oral microbiome over and over and over with the goal of reducing some of the quote unquote pathogenic bacteria, so that people can learn how the professionals are actually doing it, the quote unquote professionals, because it's not really a field. It's not a niche thing right now where someone is detailing, and it's not an easy process. Like it may take 20 tests to figure out how to move the needle on some of these, uh, uh, uh, bacteria, even on the quote unquote healthiest diet. So, could you make an argument that there is a road for learning from a professional doing it so that people can actually do it themselves like that if they choose to, you know, in the home environment? I would say so, because it's it's compliance based. I'll let you talk about. It's compliance based. At the end of the day, if I if I know a patient can be compliant to the guidance that I'm providing, which is a huge, you know, we don't know. But generally speaking, that that is uh that's I would agree with you. I think there is a pathway there. I was just just wanted to mention or I guess bring shed some light back into, um, what I mentioned earlier with the difference between just recently between 2002 and 2000, 2002 when the first oral microbiome context just contextual paper was published versus, uh, 2019 when the first animal study was published. This is we're really in a very, very early stage of what it means to target the oral microbiome in general. So, theoretically, I'm sure that, uh, there a lot of things. Even, let's say, um, an insulin, there's at-home insulin tests that you can take. I'm sure so many years ago, whoever was the first person who proposed that, you know, you can you can test your you can prick your finger just a little bit and test your blood. You know, I'm sure they were looked at, like, that's crazy, you know, never nobody's ever going to be able to do that, it's not feasible. So, right now, all things considered, we're so early in the disease, um, progression, I guess, and so early in looking at the targeting the oral microbiome that maybe 24 years 20, 30, 40 years from now, this is going to be something that everybody's going to do at home. And there will be enough knowledge to just take your little sample, put it in a little imaginary electronic thing, and it'll just tell you what to do for that day, you know? But for now, I think it's really important to work with a professional because of the gaps in the knowledge for both of us, honestly, for the patient and for the provider. Definitely. Okay. All right. Thanks, everyone. That was great. Uh, thank you so much. Appreciate it. Have a great day. Mike, can I add one thing? I just want to I just want to do it cuz it came to my brain afterwards. The oral just so if you want to, um, rector, cuz I told you it was Streptococcus oralis. They have that piece, but there it's actually Streptococcus salivarius. That's they have strains of them that actually upregulate. And one of the positive for them just we're talking is these Streptococcus salivarius can produce something called bacteriocin. So it's bacteriocin CIAN. Um, that is known to inhibit P. gingivalis growth. Interesting. So that's why So the point comes to being is how well are they being formulated to the oral microbio, I do not know. The concept is that. The concept by taking that is if you upregulate Streptococcus salivarius, there's strains that they have. I don't recall the strains right now. But those strains basically actually reduce or produce bacteriocin which reduces P. gingivalis. So, just because I said oralis earlier, there is oralis used, but it's not the one I was talking about for probiotic health. That's uses salivarius. That could be one way to reduce P. gingivalis, right? But aren't there there are at least in vitro studies where as you mentioned some of the essential oils, I've looked into this where they can, you know, they're they have, uh, bactericidal activity against P. gingivalis, like peppermint oil can, uh, can, you know, reduce, uh, growth, right? So I mean, it it goes back to this idea of it may be different for everyone where maybe someone can increase Streptococcus salivarius and then reduce P. gingivalis levels in the mouth by inhibiting growth. But then maybe others may need a different approach, which goes to specificity, right? And multiple testing. So, yeah. Right. And and the essential oils is difficult to get if you're if they're pocketed already, you're not getting that essential oil down there. Ha. So, so if you change the microbial like as what, uh, Modar was saying even for the prebiotic concept. It's like, it's difficult to get a probiotic into an area to build on and survive because everything's already occupied. But if there is a small portion of living somewhere, you provide them natural food for them, they'll thrive, right? So in this case, when they're down there, I can't get an oil down there to get actually get them out. So, it's just, but Even Q-Tip or on top of a perio brush? Trust me, we when when you go into periodontal surgeries, some of these microbes are so problematic, you got to reflect the the whole gum down and they got to go clean it from that angle. So, it's it's it gets it gets pretty nasty. Yeah. So, I bet. Yeah. All right. Well, thanks again, everyone. That was great. Uh, I appreciate your time and have a great day. Thank you. Thank you. Bye-bye.