What's up, everybody? Hopefully, you can see me okay, hear me okay. Alright. So welcome to the live stream. First one, let's see how this goes. I'm gonna go through the questions one by one, and, yeah, we'll go from there. So let's see. I'll start with the chat. If you have any questions or comments, just, leave a comment, and then I'll respond to it as we go. So let's see. Cop chat. Let's see. Live chat. Looks like there were some comments from, Lars that were cut off. But the first comment here is, if low platelet count is a, I guess, familial genetic issue, do you have any suggestions on how to raise platelet count? So I actually have experience with this. I have a client, where that's the case and actually it's, yeah. He's got, genetically low platelets. And so first, if it's a suspected genetic issue, you know, I'd like to see more than one blood test. So this is 12 blood tests. So, you know, it's consistently low. So then the question is, you're comparing you against, not just the reference range, but, you know, the studies for all cause mortality and, how it changes during aging. So So if your platelets are one fifty and that's associated with an increased all cause mortality risk in published studies, and what's optimal is in 200, March range, when considering that it's a genetic issue, do you wanna raise your platelets to, you know, the 200 to 300 range, or do you stay where you are? Or is it even possible to raise that? So, so so there is some uncertainty in that. And the way that I can find more certainty is by doing biomarker versus biomarker analysis. So and again, you can't do this with one blood test. You would need to have many blood tests over, some time span. So whether it's, you know, six blood tests a year or four over a few years, you need a lot of data. And then once you have a lot of your own blood test data, you can look at correlations for your platelet levels with, you know, known biomarkers. So glucose, lipoproteins, inflammation, liver and kidney markers, immune cells, red blood cells, etcetera. To help give you better perspective is lower, towards the low end of your range or higher towards the high end of your range because we're all gonna have a range for where our platelets, just using that as an example, will be. So then you'll you'll have more insight whether you wanna be at the high end of your range or the low end of your genetic range as it relates to other known biomarkers, of organ and systemic health. So that's how I'd recommend to go after, any biomarker that or even relatively high, as a result of a genetic issue. Alright. Let's see. Number two here. Jose, is there a resource that contains all of the optimal ranges for biomarkers? So, in terms of aging and all cause mortality risk, I don't think so. And there are even companies that, kind of pretend that they have, you know, optimal ranges, for health. And I've never seen what studies that they use. So, you know, I have many videos on many different biomarkers. Most of them found on the complete blood count, which is the, you know, the pretty typical thing that at least in The United States, you know, so the markers of kidney and liver and, lipoproteins, glucose, all those all those things, $35 blood test or less depending on where you are. So I have, you know, the published studies in videos on this channel for, a lot of them, you know, at least 10 of them. So, if you're interested in what's optimal or at least my interpretation of what's optimal based on those published studies, you know, I'd encourage just doing a search on my channel and, finding the biomarker that you're interested in. If the average person wants to replicate your approach to longevity, what guidance, principles, and lessons learned can you share that can achieve 80% of the benefits with the least amount of effort? So, my my approach is is, is highly quantified self as you can get. I believe, with more data, you can make more progress. So, you know, general recommendations aren't good enough for me. So, you know, certain groups, whether vegan, carnivore, keto, etcetera, are just saying eat this way for optimal health. It's just not good enough for me. I prefer to see the data. And what I mean by data is biomarkers. So, at the very least, you would need all your own biomarker data in terms of, blood testing several times per year. So when I first started this process, it was once a year. And, you know, I was kinda eyeballing my diet, making changes based on how, my biomarkers went. But, I I at some point, I realized that wasn't good enough. So, yeah, then I bumped it up to more than a, you know, once a once a year, three times a year, then I got to where I am now six times a year. I actually know people that blood test 12 times a year, and and, that may be a bit too much for me. I'm working towards getting to, getting to eight times a year next year. But so the the the root of it is you need a lot of your own data in order to so if you if the premise is that aging is a biochem aging and disease, and even potentially longevity are biochemical processes that happen over decades, many decades. If you know what your biochemistry looks like in youth and you can maintain that, for as long as physically possible by regularly tracking, In theory, you can optimize health, maximize health for as long as possible, slow aging, and maximize longevity. So in order to get there, you need, again, all of your own at least blood test biomarker data. So then the question is, how can you best optimize that? And then that goes down to, you know, how serious do you wanna track things? Do you wanna, you know, kinda kinda eyeball your diet or do you wanna weigh all your food and and, kinda guess it amounts? I prefer greater specificity. So I weigh everything, I track everything, I log it all, and then, you know, look for correlations between the diet and then, you know, correlations between the diet and my fitness metrics, correlations between diet and sleep to optimize sleep. So, you know, that's the best way that I see for now. Eventually, with enough data, we can automate it and make it a faster process. It takes, you know, a few hours once I get my blood test data to analyze, you know, analyze it and then make dietary changes for the next blood test. But I just don't see an easy way to do this. I mean, it's it's, it's a rigorous process, but it's a it's a process of self discovery. You know, you're learning about the owner's manual for you, and nobody can give you that information. You have to have to actually learn it through your own, you know, repeated testing and repeated measurement. So, I don't know if that's the easy answer you're looking for, Jose, but, has you know, it's the best that I've got. Alright. Bear Days, thumbs up. Nikos, thumbs up. Okay. Right. So, Bear Days asks how much, extra virgin olive oil? Yeah. So I responded to Bear Days on on Twitter. So, oils are almost never component for my, approach. They're, calorie dense and nutrient nutrient poor, and I'm trying to optimize nutrient density. So, even even things now that said, I have coconut butter, which isn't the oil. It's it's the, you know, it's the meat blended with the with the juice. So it's it's, you know, getting the fiber and the coconut fats. So it's it's not simply an oil, whereas you can just buy coconut oil rather than the the butter, which is the closer to the whole food. So once I once I promote that stance and once I tell people that, position, then automatically I get the well, you know, extra virgin olive oil has been shown to have health benefits and, all of the all of the blah blah blah that goes with that. But the fact is I've yet to see a study where, olive oil is compared against olives in in a randomized controlled trial for full spectrum biomarkers. So if you're comparing olive oil against other oils, okay, maybe it's better. Sure. But remember, my premise is oils in general are or not in general, but oils are, calorie dense and nutrient poor. So even if o olive oil's got some, you know, beneficial compounds that other oils don't have that make it better than other oils, okay. Great. But again, whole food nutrition, you know, this is a relatively recent phenomenon where evolutionarily, we're not adapted to consuming things that we didn't have for millions of years of evolution. So, again, maybe the oils are better against other oils, but I can't I I can't I find it hard to believe that olive oil would be better than whole olives matched for calories. So you take a 100 calories of olives and you give someone a 100 calories of olive oil. Will the person eating the olive oil have better better health markers or overall health, short or long term, when compared to to olives? I doubt it. So that said, I have, olive oil in my, apartment. I if I do use it ever, it's very sparingly in one gram amounts just to give me a little bit of flavor and taste. If anyone's checked my videos where I, you know, I do the biological age testing and then I put what's my diet that corresponds to that, And then I get do a full diet breakdown of what's in my diet. You may see olive oil there, but it's it's been a rare thing for, you know, many, many months in very, very small amounts. But I have olives, in my apartment. I've got a few jars of olives. Not the pimento, stuffed olives like whole olives, you know, with the seat with the pit. And that's actually I've got a couple olives on my list my food list for today. So, yeah. Olives are great. Just, I'd skip on the oil and go for the whole food. Alright. Yeah. So, Bear Days' next question. If you plan on doing carotid artery into the thickness scan and tracking over time. So I I I'd love to I'd love to do the more advanced measures of, atherosclerotic risk, including coronary artery calcium, scores. At some point, I'm I I have to slash should do that. That's more direct evidence than just looking at the lipoproteins, especially lipoproteins in the context of inflammation, which is kind of what I'm doing, in order to, evaluate risk. But the, you know, carotid artery intimate thickness and the CAC score are more direct measures. So, ideally, that's that should be at the top of the list in terms of priority. But, the blood the blood biomarkers are easier. And if I wanna do it six, eight, 12 times a year, I can do that. Appointment to get, you know, my, carotid artery thickness evaluated and, you know, a CAC scan, you know, to to see my effect of diet on that, you know, every two months. I I can't see my I can't see my, physician agreeing to that. And that's not something I can do anywhere, you know, paying out of pocket. So, that's the only drawback. You know, but again, I wouldn't use that as an excuse. For sure, I'd rec you know, put that at at the top of the list for, for getting that done. Alright. Bear days two. My exercise routine. So, yeah, this is a big one. I I've got I've I've got got, you know, Gorilla DNA where I just wanna throw around heavy weights for hours. And, once I started fitness tracking, you know, resting heart rate and heart rate variability, I started to notice that those long exercise sessions, you know, three hours of of of, you know, because it takes time. I'm doing warm ups sets. I'm doing, you know, pyramiding. So I'm working my way up, you know, to go as heavy as I can. And, you know, when you're doing compound movements for multiple body parts, that that takes a long time. So that's how I prefer to work out. But when I do that or did that, I was feeling wrecked physically, emotionally wrecked, mentally, sore for days. And I've been training since, you know, I was a teenager, young teenager, 13 years old lifting, running, biking, etcetera, stretching, the whole thing, the whole business. So, I got to the point where I was so fatigued and exhausted mentally and physically that I was like, alright. I need a fitness tracker, and, let's see what's going on. Maybe I can optimize it all. And then there's another prep premise in there too. So exercise is well known to increase average lifespan in animal models, and actually in people, there's an increase in life expectancy. But you don't see elite bodybuilders that are lean and ripped and marathon runners and pick your pick your athlete of, you know, a choice that gets to the maximum human lifespan, one twenty two or better. So there's something about exercise training that's simultaneously good for average health and average lifespan and improving that. But, one can make the argument also bad to get you towards the maximum lifespan. So is overtraining a component of that? Is, you know, the overtraining is clearly better than not training at all, being sedentary. But, is overtraining the limit limiting factor in getting, to the maximum lifespan and beyond? So one way we can assess that is by measuring resting heart rate, heart rate variability, at least the metrics of, cardiovascular overreaching. So once I integrated that into my approach about three years ago, I started to see actual, you know, biological metrics that corresponded to my mental physical health after my after these long workouts. So I've, you know, I'm not happy about it, but I changed that three hour approach, you know, once every four or five days whenever I could recover enough to train like that again into, relatively shorter, you know. So now I'm down to about a seventy minute workout, but, I don't train as heavy in some aspects. You know, I I trained heavy as a as a as a, you know, earlier in my life, heavy squats, heavy deadlifts, and ended up with herniated discs. And, you know, I wasn't I wasn't, coming at this from a position of inexperience. I was a, you know, I had four different certifications as a personal trainer working in New York. So but I I just was training too heavy all the time and just that chronic chronic burden on my spine. So I ended up a herniated disc to the point where I couldn't even put my shorts on one time. So, at least in terms of things like deadlifts, I have I have a trap bar behind me. So I use that, but I'm more careful with how heavy that I go and how many sets that I do. And, because there are a few things that age you more than injury and, herniated this. So I'm I'm careful with that. But other things, show heavy shoulder presses above my head, pull ups, seated rows, push ups off a big exercise ball. So I I include all that. I, you know, I don't like to do my I don't do like to do workout splits. I haven't figured out how to do a workout split where I'm not overtrained, gross physiologically, you know, because for whatever reason, so there's also an optimal training zone where, if I train too much too often, I feel terrible all the time. So for me, a three day cycle works best where I do a seventy minute full body workout with compound movements, push ups off a ball, pull ups, seated rows, heavy shoulder presses, relatively heavy shoulder presses, dead lifts, squats and lunges, and then a whole bunch of core stuff, a little bit of Taekwondo, some kicks, some hip mobility stuff, and and a bunch of flexibility to keep, you know, my lower back and, hips mobile and flexible. Because that's another aspect of aging that I've witnessed firsthand where, you know, people's flexibility and mobility in the hips, knees, even the ankles get so bad that it just limits quality of life. So, you know, I spend a good fifteen, twenty minutes on that in each of those seventy minute workouts. So on day one, I hit that seventy minute workout. And then day two, I have a lower, overall activity day or at least that's the goal. And I actually have got to have this quantified now in terms of my average daily heart rate on day one with the seventy minute workout. And then I shoot for a little bit lower. So, you know, an average daily heart rate of somewhere about sixty, sixty one for the whole day. And then on the next day, somewhere in the 59, 58 range. So a little bit tapered. Still active, but still still tapered. And then complete rest on the third day. So basically sedentary, just complete relaxation. And with that approach, I was able to, you know, maximize my heart rate variability, to about 58 in the summer, 58 milliseconds using RMSSD, and then my, resting heart rate was about 46. Now that that approach is somewhat modified now because, we're required to be a Tufts, which, makes me be more active because now I've gotta walk more and, it's harder to titrate that three day exercise cycle. But that's what works best for me in terms of optimizing the cardiovascular metrics, but also maintaining or improving my health, at least in terms of, like, things like my deadlifts are getting better since I'm going slow and steady to build it back up so that I don't, you know, herniate the disc again. Alright. So that's the exercise approach. Yeah. And I don't I don't quantify steps, but I find, you know, because you could take you can take 5,000 steps and it can be on a flat ground versus 5,000 steps on uphill. Right? So clearly walking uphill is gonna be a greater cardiovascular burden than walking on on flat ground. So you can quantify that by looking at your average daily heart rate. So, and that's actually gonna be more precise than the overall steps because if I'm standing and washing dishes, that's that's also adding to my heart rate burden. And it isn't, you know, technically, I'm not taking any steps. So by looking at the average daily heart rate as an index of daily exertion, I I think that that's more accurate than, just steps. And then, you know, you can also factor in body weight to that. And I introduced this in a in a video a couple weeks ago. So the average daily heart rate multiplied by your body weight is kinda like a force times distance equals total work. You know, so total physiological work on a day, you can evaluate using the average daily heart rate and your body weight. So, that's what I use, in in terms of not using step counts. Okay. So exercise zone, strength yoga. Yeah. All that's important. Yeah. And I guess, Baradez, you were asking me about Peter Peter Attia's, you know, zone zone one, zone two. And he started talking about the zones and and, I'm highly interested in this stuff and, you know, optimal health and fitness. And I'm a fan of of Peter. Don't get me wrong. But once he started talking about the zones, it just he lost me. I mean, I try to keep it simple, and I I try to keep it simple and have it a little bit more, technical than just do some exercise more than none. You know, whereas I've got this down to, you know, quantifying my average daily, heart rate on a daily basis as a measure of daily exertion and, and, you know, trying to always improve in terms of getting stronger and more flexible. I mean, to me, everything else is just, you know, noise. You know, you've gotta be in this zone for this long. Consistency is king, and I've heard him say that too, and I believe that for a long time. So, that's yeah. That's my take on the zones at atia zones. Alright. Mekkos, sirtuins and resveratrol, issues to be followed for aging and longevity. So this may be a little bit controversial and counter counterculture, but, and I'm a big fan of David Sinclair. Don't get me wrong. I'm this isn't a knock on him. I'm not trying to knock him at all. But, the sirtuin story evolved at a yeast, worms, and flies. And once the sirti one and resveratrol story hit, mammals now the the data in in, in mice at least, nowhere nowhere as convincing. I I have some of that data in a SIRT six video where SIRT six actually has been shown to extend lifespan, genetic overexpression, whereas SIRT one overexpression, which is what resveratrol is supposed to activate, doesn't extend lifespan in mice. So even the NR story, which is a part of the sirtuin sirtuin story, doesn't act doesn't increase lifespan. That was a study published too. So, now, will NR or NMN supplementation improve health? There is some data for it improving health span. But, you know, I prefer, again, greater specificity. And, you know, for those who do supplement with NR, NNN, or, resveratrol, or, you know, metformin, berberine, picu, or supplement of choice, you know, greater greater specificity. So if you have enough of your own blood test data, you you know, I don't I don't prefer to take the published studies even if they're RCTs. All RCTs and and published studies have to be evaluated at the individual level. So even if it works for a a study of a million people, it doesn't mean it's gonna work for me. I have to actually see if it works. And the way that you see if it works isn't by taking it based on hope because it worked in another study. You know, you have to see objective data, whether it's bio blood biomarkers or physical or cognitive function, whatever the biomarker may be, more data is better, to see that it actually works. So I find that, unfortunately, most people don't test their own biomarkers or objective metrics of health when they supplement to see if it works or not. Now let's assume that you are doing that and you have an ample amount of, say, blood test data of over some period of time. You can track your supplements. And, you know, for each so blood test on day one, blood test on day 60. If you record the, you know, milligram or gram dose of each supplement that you take during that sixty day period, you'll have an average supplemental intake for each of those supplements that corresponds to the next blood test. So when you do that enough, just like how I do with diet, you can then look at correlations between each of your supplements with the blood biomarkers. And by using this comprehensive approach, not just looking at, you know, say, fat intake versus glucose. I mean, fat intake versus the full spectrum of the biomarkers. Is it is a high fat keto diet overall net beneficial for the some of your biomarkers or just a few. Right? So are more biomarkers going the right direction? Is the wrong direction? At least in terms of aging and all cause mortality risk. So this approach is what I encourage for some people who wanna go and supplement, you know. Track your supplement intake, track it carefully so you know exactly how much you take. And when you blood test, you've got that data and you can line it up. Now you need a lot of that data over many blood tests. It isn't gonna be one or two blood tests. It's gonna be, you know, five blood tests with a little bit lower supplement in the middle of supplement and high intakes of that given supplement. And even then, maybe 10 blood test isn't enough to know for sure if it's net beneficial, you know, detrimental, or neutral. You may need more data. But at least you would get closer to the truth by evaluating the correlations to see if it's even significantly correlated with anything. Let's say you're taking, you know, resveratrol and you look at the, quote, unquote, big picture biomarkers as I call them, and you have literally nothing significantly correlated. Well, that suggests that you don't have to take that. It's not doing anything for you. Maybe it's placebo at best. Right? So, yeah, I prefer the data driven approach, and I hope that's where more people go towards in the future. And I should note that these blood tests that I'm getting, I'm ordering the kits. They they're you know, I'm ordering the kits online, and then I'm driving to LabCorp. You know, I'm not getting this, through through, you know, anything special or, you know, nurses drawing my blood and, you know, that's not the case. So I'm drawing going driving to LabCorp. They draw my blood and, you know, then I get the results the next day. So, if you live in a state, you know, I've gotta drive actually to the next state over because it's more convenient than, doing it in Massachusetts where they have to ship my blood to Florida and they've lost my blood. So, this has isn't actually a convenience for me to get the blood tested so many times. It takes a couple hours of my day and driving time, to get it done. So I hope that answered that question. Sirtuins and resveratrol. Okay. List of devices. So, well, I weigh myself, every day in the morning, after pooping, I find for me and and, you know, again, some people can, manage their body weight and body composition without doing this. I'm not that type. It doesn't work for me. I've tried it. I've I've I've tried to do that, you know, a bunch of times. It just doesn't work. I prefer data and, and, quantification. So I I weigh myself every morning. I have probably six years of data every day. So that's that's, number one. Number two is I'm wearing a fitness tracker. I'm not sponsored by them, but, you know, that gives me sleep stages, resting heart rate heart rate heart rate variability. And at some point, it's gonna give me not just the average daily heart rate too, but the average daily heart rate variability instead of resting value. So, that should be coming in an update. Other than that, it I'm not, no advanced devices. So, easy question relatively, to answer. And I can't say if WHOOP is better than other devices. I mean, I know that they're you know, I've presented this data in in a in a video where WHOOP was compared against, the the the gold standard for sleep studies, polysomnography. And for total sleep time and the quantity of slow wave sleep, it was just as good as the gold standard, you know, where you're getting all wired up with the electrodes. So, at least for that, I know it's pretty good. Now I haven't looked into the other studies. I know that there are a few studies on Oura in terms of sleep that weren't great, or, as good, but I haven't kept it up to date with all the literature. But if you're interested in other devices, again, I'm not sponsored by Whoop. If there's published data that shows that another, you know, fitness tracker is better at measuring these metrics that I measure than Whoop, I'll switch in a heartbeat. I'm not married to any any company. So and I try to keep it object objective like that. I don't wanna be a paid show where you can't trust what what I'm saying. You know? You know, I wanna follow the data and and go where the best stuff is. So alright. Let's see here. K. Sirtuins resveratrol, list of devices. Okay. Nikos. Many are talking about the values of the triglycerides to HDL ratio. Yeah. It is. It is an important, metric. And, you know, so actually, I didn't know this, but so VLDL, very low density lipoprotein, if if you, multiply that by five, you get pretty close to what the lab values will what you'll get on your blood test for triglycerides. So whatever your triglycerides are, if you divide by five, that's about approximately equal to your VLDL. So that said, the VLDL to HDL ratio is also good. So VLDL increases during aging and relatively higher levels, I presented this in a video relatively recently, are associated with increased cardiovascular, disease related issues. So now there may be even better metrics though than the triglycerides to HDL ratio, and that's, basically non HDL, cholesterol to divided by HDL. So there is some data and actually I think I presented that my VLDL video. That's actually pretty good, but there aren't very many studies that have come across for all cause mortality risk. Because if you're looking at that ratio of just for cardiovascular disease, what's it what about its risk for cancer and respiratory diseases and infectious diseases? I don't I don't wanna just be protected for one disease, you know, while, you know, having a good triglyceride to HDL ratio, maybe I'm protective for cardiovascular disease. But what about, you know, like I said, all these other diseases? What's the net effect on all cause mortality? Which is that's one reason I focus on that. So, but then even more recently, the ApoB to ApoA1 ratio may be even better than the non HDL to HDL ratio. So ApoB is just found basically in non HDL containing lipoproteins, including LDL, lipoprotein a, VLDL, whereas APO a one is found exclusively in HDL. So there's some data to that that's a, you know, promising biomarker for cardiovascular disease risk too. So that's all related to the triglycerides to HDL ratio. Alright. Rob Lim. What are your thoughts, about the use of herbs and adaptogens? So, in terms of herbs, I've got fresh oregano and basil. I occasionally add that into my food for, you know, flavor and taste and to take a little bit of the salt that I include, out of my diet for that day and I I replace it with, you know, oregano and basil. I've got plenty of turmeric. Actually so, you know, I also look at individual correlations for foods with the biomarkers And, over about 18 blood tests over the past past three years since I actually started tracking individual food intake. I wish I had that idea earlier instead of tracking macros and micros and looking for correlations with that with, the, you know, blood biomarkers. So in these 18 blood tests, there are only two food groups that are associated with lower inflammation. One of them is turmeric. And, so that goes to the question about herbs and, total nuts and seeds. And, actually, turmeric has a little bit of a stronger correlation. It's, like, negative 0.59 or something like that. So now is that causative? I don't know. And for this blood test, I've increased my turmeric intake, to probably five times higher than it's been over the past few blood tests, trying to get it back to where I've had it, when I've had lower CRP. Now if if it's causative, I will see some, reduction for CRP. And remember, my CRP isn't bad. On the last estimate, it was somewhere around 0.6. For my age, average is somewhere around one, But my lowest value has been about 0.2. So I'm trying to get to my lowest value, because there's published data showing that, as low as possible, less than 0.3 is optimal. So, yeah. I boosted my turmeric intake. Occasionally, few times a week, I'll put, I have green tea. I make loose leaf green tea. And then in the in the in the, tea ball, you know, it's like a metal stainless steel ball. I open it up. I put the green tea in there. I'll put, turmeric and, ginger powder, both of them powders, and sometimes licorice powder. So even though I'm double vaxxed, with Moderna, there's some evidence that licorice has a, metabolite that, blocks replication of, SARS. So whether it's gonna do anything for me or improve my immunity, I don't know. But occasionally I'll add that, you know, licorice root powder. I'll add that in, to my diet. What else do I have? I've got cardamom, cinnamon. So I'll take the cinnamon, whole cinnamon sticks and grind them up. Gonna put a cup put a couple grams in my mix of, nuts and seeds, you know, nuts and seeds and dates that I'll do a few times a week. So cinnamon, cardamom, and then, cardamom and then cloves. So I've got all of those, herbs ground, in my apartment that I use, pretty frequently. Now, the question is, are they individually besides turmeric associated with improved biomarkers? You know, the there's there's the there's published data that cinnamon can, improve insulin sensitivity and root reduce glucose levels. And in my data, I actually don't see that. So I'm thinking about, showing that data in a video that maybe it works for others, but at least for me, my cinnamon intake is not significantly correlated with lower levels of glucose. So, but again, it goes back to in terms of the herbs and adaptogens, you know, track it. Track it. Measure your biomarkers. And if you have enough data, you can actually see if what you're taking is, you know, good for you or neutral or detrimental. And even you can get towards how much of it may be optimal for you. So alright. Next. Strong opinions on rapamycin. So of all of the purported senolytics, rapamycin is probably the most promising. And that's because it extends it extends lifespan in mice, and there are a few studies where that's been shown to be the case. Now I have a video that compared rapamycin's longevity or, lifespan extending effects versus calorie restriction, which is pretty much the the gold standard for lifespan extension. And it it it doesn't extend lifespan to the magnitude that CR does. But compared to other senolytics, it's better. Now, so then people are, you know, asking me when am I gonna take rapamycin? So rapamycin's an antifungal. And and, for those of you who maybe know or don't know, I have a book that I wrote six years ago on microbial burden. Basically, we accumulate, microbes and microbial products in the blood and brain and places in tissues, places where they're not supposed to be. And, you know, if your cells are infected with virus, it's hard for your, you know, eventually your cells can go haywire. That's an autoimmune condition where you're killing your own cells. But what if those cells are in the brain and you just, you know, they've gotta go senescent and you can't kill them? Actually, there's some evidence about senescent cells having antiviral properties. So, going back to rapamycin, if I am gonna take it, you know, there are companies now that measure, microbial load in the blood. So, you know, they look at microbial DNA, not just, bacteria, but fungi and virus. So, you know, rapamycin has been shown to be a potent antifungal, including against candida. And the incidence of candida infections, blood candida infections, so candida in the blood of older people, it's like 10 to 15 times higher in older adults than younger age groups. So, you know, there's a prob a probability or chance that at some point, I'll have, a fungal blood infection, or or maybe I've got, low level now. You know? So, for me, if I'm gonna take rapamycin, I wanna take it for what it was intended for and what its best purpose is, which is to basically kill fungus. And, so, you know, I prefer to see, okay. I've got candida in blood. I've got some fun fungi in blood that is, it shouldn't be there. In normal healthy people, it's not there. For sure, I will take rapamycin in a second. And, actually, that's on my to do list. There's a company. It's not cheap though. It's like, an $800 blood test. But that's on my list to actually get my blood, microbiome essentially, sequenced. And, yeah, seeing if I've got, you know, some fungal, pathogen circulating in my blood. And then for sure, I'll take rapamycin, no no doubt. But to take it for a very long time, I mean, fifty years or so or thirty years, I just can't do it. Now, that said, if for people who are taking rapamycin, again, it goes back to, you know, the big picture biomarkers. If you're taking rapamycin, I'd recommend looking at the systemic effect. Right? Not just one or two biomarkers, you know, glucose, triglycerides, whichever, but the full spectrum. And if it's not correlated with anything, well, it's not doing anything. Right? But if you've got more biomarkers going in the right direction than wrong in terms of aging and all cause mortality risk, then maybe it's a good thing. Right? A good thing for you. Right? But, you know, I'd I'd recommend, definitely doing that analysis to see if if it is, you know, gonna be beneficial for you rather than relying solely on the animal studies or even RCTs, where, again, it may not apply to you at the individual level. So alright. So let's see here. Jacob Hands, fish oil. Future for SPM. I'm not sure what SPM is. So if you wanna, if you wanna, leave if any I don't know what SPM is, so maybe you can just, leave another comment about what that is. So that's Jacob Hands. So, once upon a time, I did take fish oil, and actually I went vegan. This is probably eight years ago. Full vegan, no fish, no meat, no cheese, none of that. Just to see how it would affect my biomarkers. My triglycerides are usually in the fifty, fifty ish range, which is, pretty good. Lowest all cause mortality risk is for, less than 90, so 50 is pretty good. I've in my studies of triathletes, the triathletes had, triglycerides in their mid fifties. Granted, I'm not a triathlete, but that's just just for comparison. So, my triglycerides almost doubled, so they went up to 90, not having fish or fish oil in my diet. And, HDL went down to 28. So and that's one of my lowest levels that I've ever had. Now, that was taking fish oil, and it was probably about two grams per day. So then once I saw that data, I took the fish oil out and then went to sardines, which had about the same amount of fish oil, the omega three fatty acids that I was supplementing with the fish oil. And immediately, my triglycerides went back down to, you know, in the fifties, and HDL went back up to the low forties where it's been, where I've slowly been able to improve it, you know, a little bit better since then. But, yeah, I'd go for the whole food. I mean, you know, whole food over oils, that's that's my preference. Nutrient density over over the, you know, processed food product. That's what I'd promote there. But again, you know, if fish oil works for you, you know, I'm gonna sound like a broken record, but go to the biomarkers and see if it's actually doing anything. Or what dose would you need to actually have a net beneficial effect on your biomarkers. The net effect of your biomarkers, not just triglycerides or HCl, things that it's known to impact, but the rest, kidney function, liver function, you know, neutrophils, lymphocytes, you know, immune cells, inflammation, overall biological age score. These are important things to track, not just the things that you know, it will impact. K. Let's see here. David Sutherland, you eat sardines every day. Is there any other fish that you consume that is similar to sardines with the same benefits? Yeah. I I don't know. I like sardines. Mackerel's got a pretty good omega three fatty acid profile too. You know, I spend a lot of time on food prep. At some point, sometimes I'm, you know, just exhausted. I don't wanna spend twenty minutes chopping a salad or, you know, twenty minutes eating, you know, or even longer. And I eat such high quantities of food that it takes a significant amount of time. So, to have to cook, like, I would eat, you know, I would eat, wild caught salmon. I would eat that every day. I like salmon a lot. But, you know, then I have to cook a big batch and then keep it in the refrigerator, and then it's not as fresh. Granted, the sardines aren't as fresh. They're canned. Who knows how long they're or tin. They're in a little tin. Who knows how long that is for? But they're super convenient. It saves saves on food prep. At least, you know, I just pop tin open them, and I just eat it, and I'm good. And it's in a standard measurement of 80 grams, so I don't have to weigh it. So, it makes my life a little bit easier. But anything that's got an omega three profile, you know, that's getting you at least a couple grams a day of of the omega threes, I'd recommend that. But even then, you know, I track how much you know, I track I track the correlations between the sardines with the blood biomarkers. And, for me, somewhere around eighty grams a day is is, associated with more biomarkers going in the right direction than wrong. So I can even titrate or anybody can even titrate how much fish may be optimal. I mean, is it is it fifty grams or 50 grams a day? Is it a 100 grams a day? More than the 80 that I'm taking in? You can evaluate that with enough data. So and even which type of fish. Right? Is sardines gonna be better for you for your, you know, the net effect on your biomarkers or or mackerel or salmon? That can be evaluated. But first and foremost, I think, taste you know, there's a balance between taste and health. Right? If you focus completely on taste, you know, pizza and ice cream, you're gonna get no no health. Right? If that's all you're eating. And if you're focused completely on health, you you know, maybe your taste is suffering. Right? So there's there's somewhat of a balance there that I try to, you know, stick to so that I can, you know, so that I can keep this, you know, this process going for as long as I can. If I'm eating things that I really don't like the taste of, it's gonna be hard to keep it in the in the approach. And I tried, things like, capers because they're loaded with, quercetin, which is a CD thirty eight inhibitor, and quercetin has a whole bunch of other health benefits. But I just could I couldn't do it. Taste of capers is just disgusting for me. I can't do it. So, yeah, there's a balance between health and taste, and and if there are other fish that you prefer, I'd I'd say go for it. Alright. Do I track my different starches? Eve hope I'm saying your name right. Eve Eve Dorfman. I don't track the different starches. I do track, total, fructose intake. So I track my fructose and sucrose which is fructose divided by two. So I do track my total fructose intake and my total carb intake. So, what's left is somewhat starch and, other simple sugars. It would, I guess, be glucose and other, you know, probably lactose because I'm getting, dairy in my diet. But, yeah, I don't I don't track starch intake. I track the fructose mainly because I'm just I eat so much fruit, pounds of fruit. I could eat nothing but fruit. I love the sweet. I'm a sweetaholic, I guess. But, yeah, I don't I don't track the starches. Alright. Data for the different starches. Yeah. So the resistant starches. So, that's that's like the first go to that most, most studies go to as a fiber supplement. But, you know, again, I prefer the whole food approach. And and, you know, so soluble fiber one one aspect of soluble fiber would be resistant starch. But there are many different types of soluble fiber besides resistant starch that, you know, you would get from, food sources besides, you know, raw bananas or, undercooked potatoes. You know, whether it's beans or, you know, fruits and vegetables, mushrooms, take your pick, nuts and seeds. So, I try to get my soluble fiber to optimize, you know, the gut back gut microbiome through, a variety of sources. And, you know, there's actually data and granted it's in a specific mouse model, a specific genetic mouse model where, they gave, soluble fiber, and it actually impacted liver cancer. Now that isn't to say if you supplement with fiber without the whole food that you'll end up with liver cancer. I mean, this is in in just in a mouse model that had a specific genetic background, but it raises the issue. If you're getting the food product rather than the whole food, is that optimal for health or are there potential detriments that are just unforeseen for now? So for me, the lowest risk is getting, soluble fiber and total fiber intake from whole foods. And I'm actually thinking about doing a video on looking at, correlations from my soluble fiber intake with the blood biomarkers. And when considering that soluble fiber is fermented exclusively by the gut bacteria, you know, we don't humans don't have the enzymes to break down soluble fiber. That would suggest that the role of the gut microbiome on impacting these blood by blood biomarkers. So that, you know, that's that's just a video idea, potentially coming up relatively soon. Alright. Different targets for starch in my diet. So, you know, I've in terms of not necessarily starch, but that's more of a carbohydrate question, as starch is carbohydrate. So, yeah. I track my macros and I track my micros and, you know, I'm experimenting with, you know, relatively higher fat. So I, you know, I grew up on this idea or I was raised or pop culture, you know, bro science back in the day used to be eat a low fat diet. This is what's optimal for health. And, you know, that's unfortunately, that's all I knew for a long time. And I didn't blood test to see if it was, you know, actually beneficial for me or not. And then, eventually, I started raising my fat intake and there seems to be an upper limit, at least for me. Maybe some people can go 60%, 80%, what are the percentages and have overall, you know, net beneficial biomarkers and, you know, good biological age and all that. But I can't for me. There seems to be an upper limit. Somewhere around a 120 grams per day, maybe too high, which is where I've been on my last few blood tests. So I'm actually experimenting with the fat amount that's optimal for that optimizes more biomarkers going in the right direction in terms of aging and all cause mortality than the wrong. Now that's also not a 10% fat diet. So currently for this blood test, I've been averaging about 93 grams of fat per day on a little bit less than 2,400 calories. So that's somewhere in the 35% fat range. So, apologies to the keto and high fat group, but, you know, I'm just following the data. But that doesn't really answer the question about starch, but in order to, you know, I'm my starch intake is probably a little bit higher, as I've, you know, added back whole grains back into my diet for this test, including, steel cut oats, barley, and, you know, some corn, some sweet corn. You know, so I'm reducing my fat intake. You know, I've gotta bring you know, increase, the calories somewhere. So and it isn't gonna be for fruit because too much fructose for me makes I mean, a whole bunch of biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. So it would have to be from starch from cutting my, fat intake. Alright. Here, John Slack. Are you considering the role of the decrease in thymus function in aging? 100%. Yes. And, you know, as I mentioned, I wrote that book. I'm not trying to make shameless plugs, but, you know, the fact is, average human lifespan about a 100 and, twenty years ago was about 40 years 40 years old. And then in the past hundred and twenty years, you know, vaccination, antibiotics, cleaner water, better sewage systems, you know, better public health have almost doubled you know, pretty much doubled the human lifespan. So, and microbes are a component, you know, limiting the effects of microbes, negative effect on our health is contributing. So, that said, there is immune senescence during aging. And if your immune system is senescent or declining during age, you're gonna have a harder time fighting off the microbes that exist everywhere. We live in their world. I mean, it's 10 to the thirty first power, bacteria and viruses that are in the world and there are only 7,000,000,000 humans sent seven times tenth of the ninth. So we're outnumbered by a factor of 10 to the twenty twenty second power by microbes. So we live in their world. So, not having, you know, a a strong immune system because of aging, in particular with thymus, you know, atrophy during aging is a huge component of that. So the big question is how do you regenerate the thymus during aging during aging? And you know I'm familiar with, Greg Fahey's, relatively recent study where they attempted to do that. I don't know if that's the best approach, but I'm glad to see that there are scientists, actively going after that because I think that'll have a a big bang for the buck, you know, regenerate the thymus or other ways to rejuvenate our immune systems during aging, whether it's through vaccination or it's through, cell, you know, cell transfer. So you take out your your best functional immune cells, grow them in addition, you, you know, reinject them back so you've got better fighting power against microbes. I'm just glad that there are scientists in the field studying that so that we can, you know, make progress. Have you seen the loss that the loss of the adaptive immune system? Yeah. For sure. So, yeah, I just addressed that increase of the innate maybe related to inflammation. Yeah. 100%. 100%. And, you know, we're a constant war with microbes. So, again, if your immune system will not if when our immune systems decline during aging, I mean, then, you know, they, like I said, they can go everywhere. They've been found in the brains of Alzheimer's disease patients, not just bacteria, but fungi and virus. They're they're in the blood. There is a blood microbiome. They've been found in tissues, including muscle. So, yeah, having a an immune system that is that's as as highly functional as possible is super important during aging. Yeah. So, okay. Rational sage. Do you think twelve hundred milligram do you think we need twelve hundred milligrams of calcium per day? So that too, you know, so, so for people who are starting this approach in terms of tracking, you know, I I advise people that you start with, a tracking app where you can, monitor your daily intake of all the macromicronutrients. So, and getting at least RDA or or what's considered an adequate intake for each of the vitamins and minerals in your diet. So cleaning up any potential dietary deficiency dietary deficiencies, I'd say, would be step one in this process. Now while you're doing that, you'd be blood testing. So you're gathering data and, you know, you're gathering objective data that you can then start to correlate with the blood test, with the diet diet, tracking. Now that said, will the RDA will the twelve hundred milligrams of calcium or any micro or, you know, micronutrient or any vitamin and mineral, will that be will that be optimal? But by at least getting the minimum and having enough blood test data and tracking your, dietary data, you can start to see by looking at how your dietary data correlates with the blood biomarkers. Again, with enough data. You can't do it with five blood tests. Maybe not even 10. I mean, 30 I have 30 blood tests and I I think I'm getting relatively close to my own personalized nutrition approach that maximizes health as observed through the biomarkers. But by doing that, I can, you know, should I take in twelve hundred milligrams of calcium? Where's fourteen hundred optimal for the net effect on the biomarkers? For example, the the vitamin k, what's considered an adequate intake, is somewhere around a hundred micrograms for men and women. My average intake is has been greater than fifteen hundred. So I'm 15 x, the RDA. Now, if that was bad for health, you'd predict that my vitamin k intake would be correlated with more of these big picture big picture biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. But that's not the case. So, by using this approach, you can actually get towards how much of the vitamin vitamins and minerals may be optimal for you rather than, you know, again, what's been published in the in even if they're randomized controlled trials or huge epidemiological studies and just associations, yeah, you can identify the personalized approach that's best for you. You just need a lot of your own data over some amount of time. I mean, I wish I did this in my twenties. You know, I, yeah, I just started to have enough data in, you know, my forties. What if I started in my twenties? Would I have slowed aging? Would my sleep be better? I don't know. Right? So all I can do is, you know, maximize and improve those things for the next, you know, eighty years or however long it takes to get to, you know, breaking the longevity record. Seventy six years. Seventy five. I don't know. I'm not calculating at the top of my head. Okay. Anita Martini. Want the next blood test to be taken without supplements. How may how long? Ideally, I mean, if you wanna you know, so that's up to you. Right? If you do two weeks, you know you took two weeks off. Right? So blood test today. Don't take any blood. You don't take any supplements. Blood test in two weeks. Right? You know, they should be cleared out of your system. I mean, supplements are water soluble. You're eating them. They, you know, they're being most of it should be absorbed, and then it's in your blood and you're getting whatever those effects. I mean, for a supplement to have long lasting effects would be, rare. Possible, but still rare. But, even if you were taking it for the first four weeks or for last four weeks, you know, if you've been tracking your intake and then stop taking it for four weeks after that and then blood test, you know, your average amount that you you'd been taking will be less than if you took it every day. Right? So, you'll have an average amount that you took for that period. Now maybe for your next blood test, you completely take it out. Right? And then maybe for the blood test after that, you put it back to where it was. So now you have three blood tests with, you know, no intermediate and high levels. Now granted, you would need probably at least five blood tests that no, five at intermediate, and five at high. So you've got a range of supplemental intake. And even that, even then with 15 blood tests, having a range of your own intake, there may be other variables that impact your biomarkers. So you'd have to go after each one of those to see which one would be affecting. You know, you it can't all be ascribed to a supplement. There may be multiple things that are affecting, you know, the biomarkers. Right? So, you've got to go through all of them. And I've had many trial and errors. I mean, I I, you know, in fact, most of it is error. You know, going after, okay, I've got this correlation and I'm gonna reduce it and it didn't change anything on the next. I'm gonna do this and it didn't change it on the next. But by doing that, you you start to see, okay, what what are the what's the noise, and what is getting closer to to the signal? So, it's gonna take a lot of blood test to get after that to get to the answer of that question. But, at least starting the process, I you know, I'd highly recommend that. Alright. David Sutherland, you track blood biomarkers, sleep stats, sleep sleep stats, heart rate, HRV. Your thoughts on genetic biomarkers. So I prefer, to to focus on the downstream effects of of the genetics. You know? So the genetics are the script. You know? What can happen. But the the metabolites and proteins that are in, like, the CBC or even the, you know, the objective, you know, resting heart rate and heart rate variability, these are downstream, you know, products of metabolism essentially. So, now do I have a specific genetic profile that leads to my, you know, biochemical and and gross physiological profile to look a certain way? Yeah. Maybe. And going back to the original you know, one of the original questions about, you know, having genetic issues where some things may be below the reference range and below what's been reported, for all cause mortality risk and aging data. But even for that, you know, if I've got some kind of genetic issue, you can identify within your own range. Do I want it to be lower? Do I want it to be high based on, you know, the the the effect on these objective biomarkers, whether they're the tracking on the wrist or in blood or blood pressure or, you know, even things like MRIs, functional MRIs in the brain, which I'd also love to do. Put that on the CAC score list, for something that I'd wanna assess. You know, how's my brain aging and can I slow it by making the various dietary changes and, how does that correlate with the blood biomarkers? Can I use my blood biomarkers to track changes in my brain and optimize brain health and keep that for as long as possible? Because once once the brain rots, who are we? What are we? Right? I mean, you could argue that aging all starts here. I mean, if if your aging starts here and you lose motivation to train and stay fit and all that, well, the aging started in the brain. Right? So, anyway, that's that's, you know, tangent. Right? So, adding weights. Yeah. So, Constantine, may I hope I hope I'm saying Constan Constenson. I apologize if I'm say if I'm saying you're wrong saying your name wrong. Am I thinking about adding weights to the blood biomarkers, especially when assessing the effect on x of exonidal biomarkers? So, yeah, I've I've addressed that question in in other other places, but I I think that that's a dangerous idea, for me at least. Now the beauty of my approach, I'd say, is I'm not married to any one way of doing it. Granted, this is how I do it is how I do it. But if others wanna try different ways under the same context because, you know, how can we if aging is aging is a biochemical process that happens over decades. Right? So you've gotta track it somehow. You need some objective biomarkers. Okay. Now how can you impact those objective biomarkers? Okay. Track diet, track fitness, track all these things. Right? Now how do you how do you optimize the objective metrics? Okay. You look at correlations. Now is there a better approach in looking at correlations? Maybe it's AI, ML, whatever it may be. Right? So, along those lines, assessing weights is kind of along those lines. But what if I assess the weights incorrectly? What if I think glucose is more important than the RDW? Or, you know, pick pick your metabolite or protein or or of of interest. Right? So if I assume one is more important than the other, if I put all my eggs on the lipoproteins and cardiovascular disease risk and pay put less weight on immune cells or inflammation or whichever it may be, I I I may be shooting myself in the foot while, you know, benefiting in in in one place and making a few other places worse. So for me, I I all of the blood biomarkers for me have equal weight. Even if I'm looking at blood pressure, equal weight to the blood biomarkers. Even the cardiovascular metrics, heart rate variability, resting heart rate, they're just one very bleached. Right? I don't make them plus two, plus one. Now if others wanna try that approach and add weights, I'd say go for it. Right? And, if I fail in this approach towards maximizing my health and optimizing human longevity, at least I can get towards my genetic maximum. And there may may be others who have a genetic maximum to actually break the human longevity record by using a data driven approach. So and maybe that approach involves using weights on these biomarkers. So if that's the case, I'd say go for it. So for me, I don't feel comfortable doing that, but, you know, I I'd easily encourage others to do it if if you feel like that's the best path forward. And maybe you'll have bet better results than me. And if that's the case, I'll I'll eventually follow if I'm smart enough. Right? If not, you know, I'll stay on my, own own path, right, which may or may not be beneficial. We'll see, you know, many decades from now. So alright. Again, cons Constant Constinson. I hope I'm saying your name right. Again, apologies apologies if I'm butchering your name. A small negative change in one biomarker would not offset a great positive change in another in another. Yeah. But, you know, and along those lines, I could put more weight in glucose and CRP, you know, insulin resistance and inflammation being the two major drivers. And they may drive everything, you know, changes in RDW or changes in immune cells. But, yeah, I'm just not I'm just not comfortable placing more weights. And then how much of a weight do I place? It was glucose plus three and RDW is plus one. You know, even so in in using Morgan Levine's phenotypic age calculator, you know, she placed weights, but but that's based on the studies that they use. They had 10,000 subjects. So based on, the correlations with the, nine biomarkers with chronological age, they were able to assign weights to each of those nine biomarkers as they contribute to the chronological age algorithm. So, or the prediction of, the age algorithm. So, RDW has a very, strong, score compared to the other biomarkers. Similarly, albumin in aging.ai contributes most to the overall score. So but at the end of one level, I just don't know how I can do that. They're able to do that because they're using the very large population based studies. You know? If I if I give, I don't know, albumin a plus three, is it really a plus three? Is it a 1.3? How much am I screwing my you know, screwing myself, or am I screwing myself if it if I overestimate the effect rather than underestimate the effect? So it's for me, it's a huge unknown. And, again, if that's how you wanna do it, I'd say go for it. And, yeah, the best approach will you know, it's an it's an evolutionary approach, the smartest and and wisest approach. Again, not that I have it, but will will become apparent. Right? So, and I'm all for others to try different things. And, you know, many decades from now, we'll see which approach is best. You know, I I actually prefer to try to optimize my health and longevity by doing it as, quote, unquote, naturally as I can for as long as I can, by learning about my own biochemistry and physiology. Right? If I'm just gonna use the blunt force of a, quote, unquote, senolytic, I can't imagine that'd be more beneficial for me. Right? So, you know, just go into that idea. If I can identify the biochemistry of youth and I can optimize that for as long as possible, will my health and lifespan extending effect be greater than just taking a senolytic, which may give me give me a two year game? I I don't know. So, again, that goes to the biomarker score, but, I'm kinda doing it from the, you know, from the the downstream effect and and working my way up as opposed to hitting it from the scene well, anyway, that's a tangent, you know, in terms of the scoring system. Right? So not a fan of the scoring system, but if others wanna try it, you know, have at it, go for it. I'm all for it. Alright. Adrian. Hello, Adrian. I know Adrian for a long time. Do you record this AMA session and put it on YouTube afterwards? 100% yes. As soon as I, yeah, as soon as we're done here, I'm gonna upload it. And, yeah, for anyone who missed it, they can check it out. David Sutherland. David's on the Patreon. Let's see. Welcome again, David. I saw your comments earlier. I love Cinnamon. I'd love to see a video on that and your blood work. Yeah. That's on the list. If slash when, and it's probably a matter of, when rather you know, sooner rather than later. It's probably gonna be one of the short and sweet videos of just looking at, you know, correlation plot for glucose and cinnamon and r, you know, the correlation coefficient and the p value and how there is in this, you know, statistically significant effect on my glucose. And then, you know, also looking at all the big picture biomarkers, the cinnamon significantly correlated with at least my cinnamon intake within my range because my range is only, you know, up to a couple grams a day. So, you know, is a couple grams up to a couple grams a day, some dietary periods that correspond to my blood test. You know, I'm averaging maybe half a gram of cinnamon per day. Is that too little? Would I see more greater effects with higher amounts? I don't know if I wanna crush so much cinnamon every day. But then again, if it impacts the biomarkers all going in the right direction, you know, maybe it's worth it. So, but that's definitely on the video list. It that again, that'll probably be a short video relatively short video. Okay. Jacob Hans, this was fascinating. Thank you. I'm trying to help. It's all that's why I'm here. Specialized pro resolving mediators 17. Yeah. I don't wanna skip that, but I don't know what I don't know what that is. HDHA. I don't know what you're asking there. K. Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruah Ruahuri. Again, apologies. Trying my best. If I'm butchering it, maybe I'm getting it right. Right right here. I don't know. I'm sorry. How do you find managing your diet along with right. So once upon a time, I cared. I don't anymore. This is who I am. This is what makes me feel comfortable. I was in a social setting yesterday. I I ate the way I usually eat beforehand. During the same time periods that I eat, you know, I eat a certain way up, you know, up to up up until about 03:00. So, you know, I wasn't I didn't get home to eat by 03:00 yesterday, so I ate by, you know, about 06:00. But the rest of my diet, I ate here, which I, you know so I didn't eat anything there and, you know, I was and they know me for a long time, so it's, you know, it's normal. It's normal for for them to know that that I do that. But me compared to everybody else, I'm clearly abnormal. Somebody was yelling on yelling at me on Facebook, you know, what you're doing is crazy and you must have some mental disorder. Yeah. Oh, maybe. Okay. But, this is what makes me happy. It doesn't negatively affect, my health. In fact, I think it well, I don't don't don't just think it makes me, you know, makes it better. And, you know, the way I rationalize it too is, you know, some people play basketball for fun. You know, they go to the park and just play pickup games and, you know, that's good enough for them. But then others, play professionally where they're practicing all day, shooting, dribbling, all of it, all of the above. It's it's their life. This is my life. This is how I do it, quantifying everything as much as I can and weighing everything and, you know, getting in the weeds and highly technical with the correlations and really trying to get the truth of the owner's manual for what how I best operate. That's just I'm obsessed with it. And, mental disorder or the other side of a genius, whichever whichever the perspective is for other people, however they perceive it, that's their choice. This is what makes me happy. So alright. JF Maldives. Which oils is better? So I I addressed that earlier. I try to stay away from the oils. I try to stay if if I do cook, it's, it boiled. Frying is an almost never. I mean, almost literally almost never. You know, you're producing, you know, the acrylamine and all the other toxic products that come with heating oils and other food components at high heat above boiling temperature. So, yeah, that's a rare thing for me. I try and skip I try and skip the the frying if you can. But, again, if your blood biomarkers look good and using cooking oils and frying, I'd say go for it. Right? How can I argue? If you show me the data and your data looks good, how can I argue? But for me, I know that, well, actually, I don't have the data to to know that, but, because I haven't I haven't fried stuff in a long time. But, yeah, if it works for you, I'd say go for it. K. Again, Constance Constance, again, butchering your name. Sorry. May have to send me a vid a a voice message to tell me how to pronounce your name. And then for anyone else that I butcher your name, gonna have to probably send me a voice message to correct me. And, again, apologies for butchering anybody's name. Relative weights, particular biomarker compared with other 16 or 17. So, yeah, again, just from, as I was saying, you know, so the Morgan Levine's, phenotypic age calculator, they did use the weights, but that was derived from NHANES NHANES, the national health and, National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, and it included two separate studies of 10,000 people each. So you can derive weights when we have such giant populations. But in my data, I mean, I have 30 something blood tests. I just don't see how I can ascribe weights unless I'm deriving a biological age calculator for my own data. But I 30 blood tests, you can't you can't do that. No. Maybe I can at some point, you know, but, yeah, I I'm not opposed to the idea of, you know, of ascribing weights, but I just wanna have enough data too. Yeah. I just had that thought that if I had enough data in theory, I could do that. But, yeah. Thank thanks, constant constant sin cons sorry. Again, I don't know how. Hopefully, you have a nickname my, for my butchering skills. Kiyoki. Hi, Gabby's dad. Okay. Great. My my 12 year old daughter's friends are on stream. Lars Morissette. Right. There we go. I sorry if I missed your comments earlier. For some reason, it got cut off, Lars. Regarding thymus, if MRI shows enlarged thymus for a 50 year old male, but no pathology suspected, would you investigate, further? I mean, I guess you'd have to look at biomarkers of thymus function, and I just don't know enough about, the cell types, the immune cell types, that would be good biomarkers of immune cell function. And when I say that, it goes beyond just looking at neutrophils, lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophils. I just don't know what good markers of thymus function you'd have to look at. And and, you know, if someone's got a an enlarged thymus, has it always been like that? I mean, how long does the data go back? Is it enlarged compared to the average population? And, you know, do you take a biopsy of it? Is it cancerous? If you if you take a biopsy and it's normal, but it's just enlarged, do they just have a genetically large thymus? I mean, there's a lot there are a lot of factors there that, are kinda beyond my expertise. I just wouldn't know, you know, how to answer that. I guess you go to an immunologist, I wouldn't even know who who to go to, whom to go to to to, best address that. Okay. Rob Lim, do you think that liposomal delivery is a good eye good ad as a tool to achieve optimal results? So some of the aging is characterized by what are so epigenetic changes are for sure a a problem in aging. Right? So certain genes are methylated or acetylated and turned off. And if you've got certain genes that are turned off and you don't have the corresponding proteins that are, you know, translated and transcribed as as a or transcribed and translated as a result, you're gonna have decrease eventually, you'll probably have decreased cellular function and decreased tissue function, eventually decreased organ, you know, and systemic function. So I see I see the whether it's a liposomal delivery or it's, kinda using this mRNA approach with vaccination to inject mRNA for proteins, that are known to decline during aging that are kinda core hub proteins that if you don't have them, maybe you age at a faster rate or have decreased cellular function in an aging rate. I definitely see a road for that. You know, if you've got an 80 year old who's got, you know, 15 proteins that are just aren't being made anymore and you could inject, you know, at regular intervals. And I think SENS has, you know, this basic idea, you know, rejuvenation idea where you're injecting whether it's the mRNA or the proteins themselves, however it may be, to restore it to restore cell and, you know, tissue function and, hopefully, organ organ function, I see great promise there. I can't tell you when that will happen, but, that's definitely promising. K. Taste First Health, David Sutherland. Great comments on genetics. Would you consider running a paid tutorial on how to implement your regimen? Yeah. I mean, I I covered I covered some of the guts of it, David, at the beginning. Maybe check out the beginning of the stream, first twenty minutes. And then, I'm I'm happy to go over my approach, you know, ad nauseam, you know, so that I can help people learn. You know, I can easily charge people too. I'm not trying to I'm not trying to get rich off this stuff. You know? There's a balance there. You know what I mean? I have to be compensated for my time, but at the same point, I wanna help people too legitimately without being looked at as, you know, just trying to make money. So, you know, I try to offer help as much as I can too. So I I check I would check out the beginning of the stream. I I talked about it a lot there, and I'll probably talk about it more in in future, live streams. I can't see when those will be. Let's see how it goes. Maybe we'll do this every week after a video. But, yeah, I'd say check out the livestream in the beginning and then, you know, we'll go from there. K. Message retracted, Jack. I don't know how to sorry. How to say your name? Frey Freyha, maybe. I don't know. How do you find choice trusted sources for supplements? So, supplements aren't a big part of my approach. I take vitamin d in the winter, and get plenty of sunshine. I try my best to get out in the sun and full body exposure. So, that takes the d out vitamin d out, supplementing in the summer. And then I take vitamin b twelve. I I don't have a preferred supplement. I know that it does something because I'm looking at, you know, things that it can affect, like homocysteine, and I have a homocysteine video as it correlates with my vitamin b twelve. That said, I can't say if one source is better than the others, but there may be other supplements that, you know, whether it's NR, NMN that maybe have more or better, you know, better purity than others. I know for us, you know, at least in the scientific world, there are, you know, standard companies that, you know, talk about the percentage of purity of the thing that you're buying. So they'll say it's 99%, you know, purity for an r. Right? But I just haven't I I just don't know enough about the the supplement, you know, world to say that, you know, that it's 99% purity if you're getting NR from a certain company. And I wouldn't even know where to find that. Hopefully, someone else can help you, you know, get that information. Sorry for not knowing. Yeah. I I do follow Peter Attia. I like that he's, he's, you know, recently so I think there was a while he was hot on the NR, and NAD story and supplements, rapamycin, and metformin. And maybe it's personal bias where I think diet and exercise can take someone farther for longer than trying to drug your way to health. So I think that's a a more recent thing that he's evolved to. Maybe I'm wrong. If I'm wrong, anyone can correct me. So, yeah, I like I like Peter. I like, I like his approach. I like that he practices what he preaches. You know, he's, I think there are longevity types that don't don't regularly exercise and then promote, you know, supplements and, you know, drugs to, again, drug yourself to better health. So, you know, I I prefer the hard work aspect of it because I'm like that. And I I don't wanna I don't wanna take my shirt off and fuss right to show everybody, but I got a decent amount of what's going on. So, so I appreciate that he's that type too. That, you know, hard work, you know, exercise I've got Rob Hanna on Twitter was saying that, you know, I commented that exercise is a grind. It's never easy, and it it shouldn't be. Right? Because when you challenge yourself, it's gonna be tough. And I try to make my workouts as challenging as possible, and that's a grind. You know, you have to grind through the tough. And and so, yeah. Anyway, that comes with health benefit health health benefits. Right? Body composition, insulin sensitivity, etcetera, you know, improve immune, immunity. So, yeah. I'm a fan I'm a fan of, Peter Attie. Actually, you know, relatedly too, Rhonda Rhonda Patrick. I like Rhonda too. Rhonda Rhonda does deep dives into literature, very similar to how I do it. The thing is though, she's got time on her hands where I'm juggling, a whole bunch of different things in my life, where she can it looks like she'll do 200 pay you know, 200 different papers and do a comprehensive review as if it's a scientific study that she's gonna publish. Only she'll put it on YouTube or Patreon. I do deep dives, as deep of a dive as I can for as many papers that exist on the subject. And luckily, for things like aging and all cause mortality risk, it isn't, you know, 200 papers. It'll be, you know, you know, handfuls, which is easier easier to look at. So, yeah, I'm a fan of her too in that sphere in that same sphere. Yeah. It's not just the cardiovascular system, and I kinda touched on this, earlier. You know, it's it's all the above. It's it's mobility, it's balance, it's, flexibility, it's strength through full range of motion, not doing 90 degree squats, but full range of motion. You know, that's basically, ATG. Right? Ass to grass. So, and strength through that full range of motion too. So, that's all that's all part of my approach. I'm not just focused on the cardiovascular. It's strength, mobility, balance, flexibility, core, functional stuff, functional strength, and and all that stuff too. So, it's all the above. I wouldn't focus on one as and, again, also the biomarkers and the diet. So it's the whole it's the whole it's the whole of which. Alright. Jose Jose Chung. Do you believe the Genova ion testing provides value value beyond the typical lab test? So, actually, the Genova ion test used to be, a company called Metametrics and small world. I actually interviewed for them, for a postdoc after I got my PhD. Now I'm not trying to flex on education. Just saying that's long story short. So I got the their ion test done a few times, and this is I mean, you know, we're talking, man, fifteen years ago. So that actually was one of the ways that it opened my eyes to this idea of biochemical testing and optimizing, you know, biochemistry as a function of aging and disease. Now is there value in looking at the, you know, every mineral that exists? And when you think about minerals or micromolar amounts or less, this is, you know, a millionth of, you know, a mole, or more moles moles per liter. So, is there more value looking at the very small, you know, circulating minerals or looking at things that are the most abundant in blood? For example, the most abundant protein in blood is albumin by far. The most abundant cell type in blood are red blood cells. Right? So, maybe this goes to the scoring system too. It it you know, if there was a scoring system, I would put, you know, individual vitamin circulating vitamin and mineral levels lower than the things that are the most highly abundant. You know? So if you're if you're in an ecosystem, you'd predict that the biggest tree in the forest would take up the most nutrients and have the biggest impact on the overall ecosystem or the biggest trees, not just focusing on one tree because that's reductions. But we predicted the biggest trees in the forest would have the greatest impact on the ecosystem. Now if you're focusing focusing on just the little weeds, the many little weeds, yeah, maybe you look at enough weeds and it's got an, you know, an impact on the overall ecosystem. But I try to go after the biggest fish and, you know, the the the most abundant cell types, red blood cells, immune cells that are circulating in blood, the largest pro the largest amount of proteins by concentration of blood albumin, glucose, which is, probably the most abundant sugar in blood. Right? So, now that said, I have gotten some mineral testing. I had selenium tested. I don't know if I mentioned my selenium intake in a video, but then also vitamin d. So within the micronutrients, vitamins and minerals, some of them may be more important than others. But, for but then what's optimal is even more debatable for the micronutrients in blood, especially with the ion test. Because, you know, for the for the things that are more heavily abundant in blood that are commonly performed, like, on the test that I get, the CBC, this, you know, the complete blood count, Again, the things that you get at a typical doctor's appointment every year. Other than iron oh, and, actually, things like sodium, potassium, you know, things electrolytes that are indicative of kidney function. You know, all the other vitamins and minerals that you would find. And, again, this isn't a knock on the ion test, you know. But the fact is there aren't large datasets, you know, 10,000 group studies of 10,000 people to know what's optimal. So what do you what's that reference reference range that they provide? What are they comparing that against? Is it a a study of 200 people, of 200 of their client of of their clients or, you know, what what's that data based on? So, yeah, I try to I I I tend to focus most but this again goes to the scoring system, which makes me sound like I actually have an informal scoring system. I tend to focus on the most abundant stuff in blood that's been well characterized for very a very long time. You know, some of the things on the on that blood test, you know, the CBC, have been studied to fifty to a hundred years plus in terms of published studies, for aging and all cause mortality risk. So they're well characterized, other than, you know, the more, obscure things like, you know, well, even the vitamins and minerals, there is some data, but just not as much as the most abundant stuff in blood studies, abdomen, red blood cells, etcetera. Alright. Let's see what else we've got there. David Southern. This is fun. I like how you're betting on yourself. Look. Even to beat the age record, even if I don't beat it, right, maybe my genetic maximum under the best conditions, and I'd say the best conditions, I mean, diet, exercise, whatever supplements, whatever senolytics I'll take at some point. Whatever that may be. Maybe my genetic maximum is 95. Right? I prefer to do this, use this approach and get to 95 than not do it and be dead at 70. You know, on my dad's side, his dad died at 67. On my mom's side, his her dad died at 67. My dad is currently 78, about to be 79. So he's doing better. But, at least I'll get to my genetic maximum. And then this approach or at least using that your own data and the published data to drive your health choices, someone's gonna get there. Right? And it won't just be by accident and chance. You know, I think I think the human longevity record, it's it's almost exclusively based on genetics. Right? Nobody nobody even the CR group, you know, there there, you know, there are people who are more I don't wanna talk badly about them. But just this approach of using data to drive your your diet and fitness, etcetera, someone's gonna break that longevity record using objective metrics of health. Right? And so in other words, they'll have the genetic background to do it, and they'll optimize they'll get as much juice from the orange as physically possible. So if it's not me, I hope that at least this approach can help others get to their genetic maximum, and one of us or many of us will break that break that record. I was gonna say other words other adjectives before the record, but, you know, YouTube. Gotta keep it clean. Family friendly. Alright. You have a thousand dollar bet to place on a technology that reverses a, aging damage. So AI. And, you know, I've talked in machine learning types, about using a machine learning slash AI approach on my own data. Right? Because I've got, you know, two thousand plus days of dietary data, 30 plus blood tests, over the past six, you know, six and a half years. And to them, it's just not enough data. But, you know, if I had an algorithm and, like, you know, an AI or machine learning based algorithm that could give me predictions for my diet, it would be more precise than using the correlations and, you know, it's kind of a rudimentary rudimentary approach. So I put my money on AI because with enough data, the AI will get better just like, you know, the self driving cars. It gets better with more data, or it should get better if it's a it's a properly coded algorithm. It should get better with with more data. So, you know, AI is gonna make I see AI making the biggest impact because you're going from, you know, published studies to take a supplement or a drug to you have a certain genotype, and you should eat a certain diet, and you should exercise this much or x amount, because the algorithm predicts that will be best for your health. And then when you try that, you'll have, you know, recalibration of the data with more data to get closer to what's optimal for you. So I see AI making, and there are there are companies, obviously, that are doing that aging.a I, those guys in Silico Group, if they're using it. So, yeah, I think AI will be make a huge impact. And then, you know, the AI approach too, in terms of supplements and drugs, you know, along the same lines, they'll be able to predict with higher certainty who should get what and how much in order to make the biggest impact on health, whether it's, you know, killing cancer cells or extending, you know, health and longevity. So I put my money on AI. That's that's where I'd invest. Cathy Wood. Right? I'd invested in, you know, AI machine learning, focused companies. Oh, boy. Ron has got over to the dark side. I guess, what, with, Shilling Shilling products and yeah. Yeah. I can't I can't I can't talk speak to that because I haven't I haven't seen that side, but and I actually don't know her. So and I don't follow her that closely to know, how she may have gone through the dark side on that. But detox approach. So when I hear the detox, Rob Lim, so the major the major organ that that detoxes is the liver. Right? So this can be measured. Right? These quote, unquote detox diets I mean, let's see liver enzymes as a start. Right? And you'd predict that if if you had some quote unquote detox issues, you'd have higher than normal or higher, liver enzymes being correlated with more biomarkers of your own going in the wrong direction than right. So I just prefer, you know, some data to back up any of these detox, quote unquote detox, you know, driven diets. You know, if detox involves not eating a Western diet and cutting out the processed junk, probably, you know, that's probably a good start. But, you know, juices and all this other nonsense, I just don't buy it. Yeah. Not that said, I'm not opposed to junk food. You know, it's for me, I'm like a recovering junk foodaholic. I grew up on eating cakes and cookies all the time, not knowing about the, you know, the health. I just thought being lean was good enough, and that's clearly not good enough. So after I blood test, I usually have some junk. You know? Like, so I'm gonna blood test tomorrow morning, and I I've already planned what I'm gonna have, and it's gonna be the same as, on the day of my last blood test or after it. So basically making my own homemade Reese's peanut butter cups by mixing Nutella with peanut butter, and I've got probably a thousand calories that I'm gonna eat of that, and then that's it For until the next blood test, whether it's six weeks or two months, I shut it off. No junk, no process, no nonsense. All whole foods. And for me, that works best. You know, some some people can have cheat meals or cheat days once a week, whenever it may be. I I can't. I obsess about it, and and then it doesn't become a cheat meal or a cheat day. Every day becomes a cheat meal or cheat day. It negatively affects my mental and physical health. So doing it once in a once in a while, like, once a month, which is basically what it boils down to for once every two months, or sometimes less, once every four months I went, is what works for me. So but some people may be able to get away with eating, you know, junk, lots of junk, some junk, and have optimal biomarkers. I mean, they're you know, it's something like five percent of centenarians, smoke. So, I mean, it's a low probability, five percent, but somehow they get there. Right? So, if it works for you and you've got the biomarker data to show it, I mean, you know, you know, good on you. Congrats. But I don't. Alright. Let's see. Bug generator. What's your personal opinion on metformin? Yeah. Again, I I touched on this earlier. I'll post the stream a little bit later as soon as it uploads. But, whether it's metformin or any any drug slash supplement, I wouldn't be taking it just for glucose. And for the clients that I that I work with, I, you know, I recommend that, you know, you track how much, how often. So if you take metformin and how much of it you take, you record that data every day. So you have an average metformin intake for each dietary period that corresponds to a blood test. And then with enough blood test results, you can actually see is metformin only correlated with your glucose, or is it correlated with more biomarkers, quote, unquote, the big picture biomarkers going the right direction and wrong? Or is it neutral? The same amount of biomarkers going in the right direction is wrong, then that would suggest it's not doing anything. Right? So that's my take on metformin or, any drug. And, you know, I believe if you use that if you use that approach, you can actually figure out which ones are gonna work for you or or not. Right? So, just again, using data, your own data to see if these things work or not rather than, okay, it worked in a published study. I'm gonna take it based on hope, but then never looking at your own data to see if it actually works. I think the field the field has to get beyond that. And, you know but then again, where's the money in that? Right? So this becomes an individual, and this is part of this is part of what I wanna do. I wanna, you know, empower people to do this stuff on their own. Right? I'm gonna put out as much of the aging and all cause mortality data as I can, but it's almost like, you know, it's almost like a Bitcoin, you know, or or blockchain, you know, decentralized approach other than having the published studies for what may be optimal. You know, everybody doing it on their own and and optimizing their own health because, you know, nobody's gonna do it for you. Right? So, I was preaching there. Sorry about that. Alright. Next on the list here, Bear Days. Speaking of Rhonda, do I use a sauna? I unfortunately, I don't. I don't have a gym membership. My schedule's due just too packed right now. You know, I've got a little bit of, home gym in my small apartment, relatively small Boston apartment. And I've got a bunch of free weights, that I use. But, so I don't have a gym membership where I can access a sauna, but, eventually, I'm gonna move into a bigger place, and it would be great to have a sauna in my place. You know, that'd be that'd be fantastic. Yeah. I think anything that can stimulate blood flow, which, you know, you you increase your, core body temperature, you're gonna stimulate more blood flow. And it's kinda like the hyperbaric oxygen story where there's there are some studies that show it has a positive effect on, you know, various health related outcomes. So anything that can stimulate blood flow, which can get more oxygen and nutrition to the to the to the tissues, especially the brain, probably a good thing, you know. So, yeah, I'm all for all for sauna. Occasional hyperbaric oxygen therapy may be a good idea too. But even then, it becomes a question of how much is too much. Like, I saw Joe Rogan talking about he goes in to the sauna. I think he pumps it up to a 190 degrees Fahrenheit. I mean, boiling temperature is two twelve Fahrenheit. Like, yeah. I think, you know, there's there's some amount of crazy going on there where it could be doing more harm than good. So, but that can be tracked and quantified too. Right? You know, you can do x amount of sauna at x temperature for x amount of minutes, and you can see, you know, how does it affect my long term blood blood pressure, or does it affect the biomarkers, or sleep metrics or heart rate variability and resting heart rate? As long as you've got some objective data, you know, that that's what I would, promote for that, but all for sauna. Let's see. Yep. Studies look incredible. David Sutherland, thanks for asking about sauna. Don Lethem. Looks like we're coming to the end here. Do you think regular whole blood donations yeah. I don't know, Don. Do you think regular blood donations impact pheno age? I don't know. I I haven't donated blood to say, but that can be tracked. Right? Again, if you blood test on day one and you blood test on day 60, if you if you donate a blood one time during that sixty day period or you donated blood five times, you know, you could in theory, you could donate blood, however many times you like. And then you could correlate how many times you donated blood, with an with enough blood test results, with your blood biomarkers. Right? But you would need a lot of blood test results, over time. Right? So, yeah, it's a good idea. But then there's gonna be some risk there, you know, too. For example, you know, I'm kinda nervous about poking my veins more often than, you know, once a month. If I poke my vein to get blood for for blood testing, how how is there an upper limit, or is there a time frame for maximum recovery where now I'm poking my veins so much that I just have, you know, scar tissue, and it's just not healing properly, and maybe there'll be adverse effects. So, you know, I just don't know if there's, you know, an upper limit on how often you can donate blood and and and, you know, bleed, you know, basically bleed out. Right? So that's that's a variable to consider too, whether it's blood donation or how often, you know, for the frequency of blood testing. For me, again, six times a year, so I'm basically doing three in the left, three in the right. It seems to be okay. No no problems, but maybe there's an upper limit. No cheat day for Christmas. So, you know, as I mentioned, I'm gonna blood test tomorrow. I've got my I've got those homemade peanut butter cups, which I did for my last blood test too, which was delicious. But, so, yeah, I'm gonna go see my parents in in New York, and, Northeast pizza is pretty fantastic. So I'm thinking about hitting up some of the best spots and, you know, probably getting a slice, maybe two. But that'll be it. I'm you know, I've gotta shut it down. Again, if I if I'm if I try to be too lenient, I just divulge into, just not good. And I'm trying to get myself out of that. So and it's been a while since I've been in it, so it's nice to not, you know, eat junk. And when I say a while, I mean, we're talking probably seven, eight months, where I've been doing it doing it where it's only junk on the after the blood test and then nothing until the next blood test. So this this blood test will probably be the first where it's after the blood test, a couple weeks after a slice of pizza or two, and then nothing until again, until the blood test. So basically two two or three cheat days over a forty day span or sixty day span till the next blood test. So k. Let's see. Don, are you aware of any next gen pheno age like clocks that seem to be published? Yeah. I mean, the IH, which was immune cell markers, unfortunately, most of them are not, commercially available, which is a huge down downgrade. I'd love to look at immune age and optimize that. Excuse me. Just beyond just beyond looking at immune cell types, which I also think is very important, neutrophils, lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophils. Because if you're just looking at total white blood cell counts, you know, some of those, white blood cell counts go in different directions, during aging. Lymphocytes go down, monocyte monocytes and neutrophils go up. So if you're only looking at looking at the whole, you know, the total white blood cells, you may lose those effects. I mean, you can even have normal white blood cells and you know, it can be, having neutrophils to lymphocyte ratio that's just way too high. In other words, having very low levels levels of lymphocytes, very high levels of neutrophils, but having normal or at least within that quote, unquote optimal range for, eight, you know, reducing all cause mortality risk. You know? So white blood cell count in the 3.5 to six six range. So you could be in that range, but your neutrophils be almost all of it and lymphocytes be almost none of it. And so but the that age is is very promising, especially since they go beyond just these cell types, neutrophils, lymphocytes, you know, etcetera. But, again, not commercially available. And then I know Morgan's working on, you know, more advanced epigenetic clocks. So I'm excited to see everything that her lab, puts out along those lines, because I guess there's some accuracy issues where the, you know, just from the same sample, I guess, they can get different epigenetic ages that just have too big of a range. So there's some accuracy issues. So, but she's got recent work that they they her group clarifies some of that. So I'm I'm glad to see that. But, yeah, I try to you know, but then even, you know, ohmic clocks, which is my day job, right, as a scientist. And, again, I'm not trying to flex just what I do. But, you know, the big question is, you know, if I've got a, you know, a a metabolomic, you know, so as many of the circulating blood metabolites that can predict biological age, You know, there are one papers that have been published, but their correlations are not as good as Morgan's PhenoAge, which are those tried and true biomarkers that have been studied fifty to a hundred years plus. So, yeah, the metabolites or an omic based approach may be a next gen approach. But is it better, or does it add value to the already existing, you know so Horvath's clock? I find it hard to believe something's gonna beat Horvath's clock, because its correlation with chronological age was very close to one. I mean, it's almost perfectly linear. So, but let's see. Right? I'm I'm always hoping for next generation clock. So, let's see. You know, I'd like to see the evolution from the clocks go towards, you know, where we you know, a smart toilet where I peeing, pooping, or somehow finger prick. And now I don't have to go to a blood last blood testing, organization. You know, I can just do this from home and get instantaneous data. So, that's kinda my hope where, you know, we're able to optimize this stuff on an hour to hour basis as opposed to, you know, a sixty day period, which is what, you know, I'm doing now. Let's see here. So, David, last question. For some reason, you need to be a competitive APIA c deep diver. What benefits would you expect? Probably kick ass lung function, being able to, resist the extreme pressure, you know, of going to deep sea diving. Now how would that affect, aging? I mean, I don't know. If there's data for deep sea divers having extended longevity, I'd love to see it. That's that's an interesting thought. Yeah. So, Don, so Don's question. Any predictions on how the young blood efforts by catcher and the boys will impact PhenoAge? So I think a very like, the billion dollar question is is, maybe it's not even billion, maybe it's trillion. What are the factors in blood that are driving the improved health, in the in the parabiosis experiments? Right? So my bias is microbial burden, which they're not looking at. Microbial burden increases, like I said, in blood. As I said, you know, just candida as an example. Ten to fifteen fold increased incidence of blood candida infections in older adults versus younger age groups. And then there's similar data for things like, bacterial infections. So staphylococcus aureus or E. Coli, ten to fifteen fold increase. So, there's a greater burden of microbes in blood during aging. So, is that part of the effect? The parabolicis effect where they're diluting or they're you know, the young blood is, you know, the immune cells are, better than the old immune cells. So now they're better able to fight off. That hasn't been studied yet. I mean, and that's actually not their focus, you know. They're going after proteins whether it's GDF 11, so or or other stuff. And then actually in a in one of my videos, you know, that paper that did in injections of saline. Sorry. Saline versus, albumin injections. And they extended the lifespan, in the albumin injected mice. So albumin decreases during aging, and that could be one effect where maybe you're restoring, you know, age related losses for albumin in the old mice by using young young blood. I think that approach is important. I mean, it'll help get towards the truth of what the young blood the young blood is impacting to extend lifespan in the aged mice, health span and lifespan. So, will it be what what they're pursuing now? I don't know. But, again, my my preference slash bias is the microbiome the blood microbiome, which isn't being studied. But, yeah, I'm interested to see where that story goes, and I'm sure it's gonna lead to something fruitful. And then potentially, that can be used as a, you know, as a therapeutic, knowing that it works in mice. So I'm excited about that that that that research. Alright. Humanity plus London. CR causes lymphocytes to drop in mice long term but retain their responsive responsivity. Yeah. But, you know, that kinda goes to the question too of, you know, too low for lymphocytes is not good. Too high, also not good. And that's based on the published studies. And even if you go by the 2,000 lymphocytes, what's been reported as lowest all cause mortality risk, you know, let's say you're on CR. Now maybe you've got a, you know, your immune cells are exposed to lesser amounts of microbes. You just don't need as many lymphocytes to be circulating. Whereas someone who's not on CR, that's not the case, and they have more circulating lymphocytes because they're fighting off more microbial invaders. So, yeah, maybe that's the case. But if you showed me someone on CR that had lymphocytes of 800 versus, say, I don't know, 1,800, it it'd be hard to convince me that 800 would be optimal. Now if someone has and and now would you stay married to CR knowing you had 800 lymphocytes, which is dangerously low? I mean, you know, just to put put it in a perspective, there's some medical term called lymphocytopenia, which is a diagnosis of having lymphocytes below a thousand, cells per microliter. So so, it's like that because that's associated with poor outcomes. So if someone on CR had 800, you know, lymphocytes, and they said, well, that's what people on CR show. Like, that that's a dangerous game to play. You know? So, now would would, would going to, you know, a higher amount be optimal? I mean, you can do that analysis. Right? You can look at the correlations for your lymphocytes with the big picture biomarkers. And if 800 lymphocytes are truly bad for health, you'd expect to see more biomarkers systemic going in the wrong direction than right. And I I talked about this early on the stream. So if you're interested in that, just check out my my thoughts on that. But, the other side of that coin is maybe the magnitude of CR is too dramatic. Right? So is 20% CR optimal? Is 8% CR CR? What's the percentage of CR that optimizes health and lifespan? So so in mice, I mean, you know, you can give them 40% less calories, even 60% less calories, dramatic increases in lifespan. But remember too, these are caged animals eating a standard diet. No deviation. So humans don't work like that. We all have varying amounts of physical activity and, you know, it's not a jail diet. Basically, that mouse is in it. It's it's on a jail diet. It's it's encaged. Can't go anywhere. It's not exercising, and it's eating the same diet for its lifespan. So and I'm a fan of CR. In fact, I'm, you know, a little bit CR myself, somewhere, you know, depending on what you consider my ad lib. Is it 2,800? Is it closer to my recent 2,500? I'm somewhere four to, you know, 16% CR. Now if you go too low in CR, maybe your lymphocytes get to 800, and now that's just, as I said, dangerously low. So using this approach where you evaluate your biomarker versus other biomarkers too, you can kinda get towards even optimizing what's the magnitude of CR that's optimal for the full spectrum of biomarkers, not just a few things, whether it's inflammation or, you know, glucose, etcetera. Alright. Is protein above 1.2 to two grams per kilogram? Current weight okay. I'm trying to recover from sarcopenia. Or would would this be the compromise of accelerated aging? So, one way you can assess protein intake, and I have a video on this, is, by looking at blood urea night blood urea nitrogen. So when there's too much protein that isn't being metabolized for protein synthesis, it your body takes off the amino groups, the n h two, and reformulates them into urea. So, if your blood urea nitrogen levels are relatively high, in my latest video I showed, somewhere around 16, was associate sixteen milligrams per deciliter associated with lowest all cause mortality risk. The reference range is much much wider than that, though. I think in some cases, it goes up to twenty four. But the all cause mortality data and what's found in youth is somewhere somewhere lower, somewhere in the 13 to 16 range. So I'd say if you increase your protein intake, I wouldn't go beyond a blood urine nitrogen of 13 to 16. I'd keep it you know, that's what is associated in, found in youth, and that's what's associated with lowest all cause mortality risk. So if your protein intake gets too high, and now your blood urine nitrogen, again, assuming your kidney function is normal. Because if your kidney function is a little bit suboptimal, you'll have elevated BUN. In that case, I definitely would not recommend increasing or having a relatively high protein intake because you're gonna increase BUN. And without going down the rabbit hole of that, higher bun can impact your gut microbiome to change its composition to make quote unquote bad metabolites, but, that's story for another day. So, but you can use that blood urea nitrogen measurement, which is a blood test to titrate your protein intake. Alternatively, not just focusing on the one biomarker as I do, I look at my overall protein intake in correlation with all of those, quote, unquote, big picture biomarkers. So for me, I've had protein intakes as high as, on average per day that correspond to a blood test as a 140 grams per day, which is about two grams. I mean, I'm I'm about seventy kilograms. So that's in that range that you mentioned for, you know, grams of protein per kilogram body weight. But, but I've also had protein intakes average per day, not just one day before the test. I mean, average for every day that corresponds to the blood test of, of about 70 to 80 grams per day. So because I have a range of intakes there and so many blood tests, I can see, should I be eating towards the higher end of my range of protein or the lower end of my range? And also I can assess if I'm eating too low protein on my workouts. Do I feel weaker? Right? So that's a that's a component to or not just feel weaker. Am I getting weaker? And is protein a factor? So for me, I've actually settled based on the biomarker data, not at the lowest amount of protein in my range and the highest amount, factoring all of the things I mentioned somewhere in the middle for now, actually. So I'm about a 107 grams for, protein per day, which is, so I'm about seventy kilograms right now. So that's what, you know, hundred and seventy divided by seventy. That's like 1.4. But I'm active. I'm highly active. You know, vigorous workouts. So every day I'm doing something, walking, biking, whatever it may be. So, you know, it it's gonna vary based on activity too. But I I'd say use an objective approach to determine your protein intake. Don't just use the published studies. You've gotta see if it works for you, and I'd consider all the factors, the blood biomarkers, your your your fitness workouts, in order to assess how much is optimal. K. Let's see. Where are we? K. The unbelievable FFDG. Hi, Michael. Just the big. Thank you for providing super high quality videos. Thank you from Germany. Cheers. I appreciate that. Doing my best. Momo Doctor Michael, you observe your do you observe observe your cortisol and other hormones because because they might affect your readings, especially fasting blood sugar? Also, do you measure blood pressure? Yeah. So, there are definitely there are definitely levels to this. And for now, I'm ex almost exclusively focused on those, you know, the standard blood blood test that you get at a yearly physical, the quote, unquote big picture biomarkers. It's about 40 variables that distilled it down to about 23, 24. And then other stuff that's also included in there like CRP, homocysteine, which for me tends to go about two times higher than it should. So I have to keep an eye on it. And then things like lipoprotein a, which I have a propensity to be higher than the reference range, which is definitely going the wrong direction. I'm still focused on optimizing that. Now that said, I have 30 plus blood tests and, you know but eventually, I can see the point where I just have so much data that I know what approach in terms of diet, even fitness, you know, titrating that towards how much should I be working out, you know, in all my workouts, etcetera. You know, I I'll have my nutrition completely mapped. Then adding on the hormones. Right? Because I don't if I'm looking at just too many things, it's easy to get lost. I'm trying to I'm trying to optimize, you know, start from the relatively small scale and then build my way out. And then, you know, add the layers, once I've optimized, you know, the small stuff. But if you have too much data, it's easy to get lost in noise. So, cortisol would be on the list. Sex hormones, you know, testosterone for sure would be on the list. Yeah. That those are all definitely on the list. And once I start tracking them, I mean, I can't go back. Right? So I've gotta, you know, it's it's a six they've gotta stay in the approach so that I get enough data to optimize them too. So, but not yet. I I do occasionally have things like PSA just to, you know, minimize or to see where that's at to minimize, you know, prostate cancer, risk. But, yeah, for sure, the hormones are on the list eventually, yeah, at a later date. Where else are we here? Blood pressure. I do have blood pressure cuff. I wish I could be more consistent in measuring it, like, every day, but, I just do it occasionally. And what I mean by occasionally is maybe once a month. But I have I do track it. I do log it. I'm consistently somewhere around one twenty over 73, something like that. Some days a little bit higher, some days a little bit lower, somewhere in the one sixteen to one twenty five range. There's data one fifteen is optimal. And, so I'm I'm trying to get my blood pressure closer to one fifteen over around 70, or optimal for at least brain health. There's a study of I've been thinking about doing a video on that. And one one way I'm going after that is, you know, getting a little bit leaner even though I'm, you know, I'm relatively lean. My body fat is probably 12% or or so or a little little less. I've been leaner. And, so I'm working towards getting back towards that. You know, maybe a five pound weight loss can reduce my blood pressure from, you know, where it is to one fifteen or even a little better. So, I'm working towards that. Some things work in progress. That's one of them. But I wish I was more consistent. It's just, and also, you know, with the blood pressure too. You know, I'd have to do it under the same conditions every day, and just some days, it's just not possible to do that. Like, you know, do I do it fasted in the morning while I've got other stuff to do in the morning, get my, you know, 12 year old ready for school. It's just impractical. Do I do it at two in the afternoon? You know, do I do before bed? I mean, all of that data is important. There's probably some, you know, variance throughout the day, for blood pressure. So but that's definitely on my list. I do track it. I mean, I actually do record it so that I pay attention to it. And, Yeah. Don't want it to go too high and definitely working on towards getting it lower. True age clock has the same clocks to the Dunedin pace that tracks phenotypes instead of biological age. Have I looked at that dataset? So I'm a big fan of, Daniel Belsky, who's, published on Dunedin PACE. If the true age clock is the same epigenetic clock that was in that recent AKG study, buyer beware. I want that data to be true where it you know, they saw an eight year reduction in epigenetic age by the true age epigenetic test, but they only looked at three CPGs. And in contrast, Horvath's clock is hundreds of CPGs. In some cases, they did thousands. You know, could you cherry pick a few methylation sites to have a, you know, an epigenetic clock? But how good is it? You know? And they didn't look at, you know, Horvath's data is derived on large datasets, thousands of people, to be able to make predictions. I haven't seen that data for TruAge. So what is the data what is their what is their clock based on? It's based on three CPGs, but it wasn't derived on a large dataset. And then they're they're a company trying to, sell product. And I I hate to sound like a conspiracy theorist, but, if you're trying to sell product and your epigenetic clock only has three CPGs, and most people don't know these stats and think that your epigenetic clock is as good as the best epigenetic clocks, they are not all the same or even close to being the same for their predictive ability. Maybe you sell more product, and I I hope that's not the case, and I hope I'm wrong. And I hope eventually they'll come up come out with true age, validation data in, like, these, you know, 10,000 people studies that Horvath and, you know, the Morgan Levine have done and others, GrimAge. But, for that, I'd say buyer buyer beware for now, especially all of the commercial clocks unless it's Horvath or, GrimAge. That's those are the best of the best, and they're they're they're best of the best because there's data published data for it. You can evaluate if they're good or not because there's actual publications for it. The individual company selling it, and they it just makes me nervous. K. Well, my mom's on the on the stream. Hello, mom. You mentioned cinnamon. Which one? Ceylon. It should be Ceylon or regular that has coumarin. Yeah. I used the, Ceylon some cinnamon, not the one that has coumarin, just to play it safe. Matthew, if you ever get all the food exercise, I will. It's not an ever. I will. But the thing is, you know, the the the the variables may change just as a result of chronological aid, at which point I may have to work harder in my diet to improve the things. Right? So the you know, it's it's a constant it's a constant tug of war. Right? So I I'll always be doing it, but for sure, I believe I'm getting closer to what the optimal approach is. So, I wouldn't say it's an if you ever get, but when. But alright. Wordplay. I'm sorry. Would you consider donating plasma to see what the effect yeah. For sure. Donating plasma to see what the effect would be. 100%. Any way that I can help, if it means donating some blood to help someone for sure, especially if I had, super blood from my age. Right? So for sure, I'd help. But, clearly, I mean, if you wanna don't use blood from someone who's, you know, young I mean, I'm pushing 50 chronologically granted, maybe not biologically, whatever the data may show. But, I mean, it'd probably be better to have a 20 year old who's highly fit than, you know, someone in my chronological age. So alright, Matthew. Morgan Levine in a recent interview said a lot of yeah. That's exactly. And, you know, I I'm I'm big fan of Morgan. She's fantastic. She's an icon of rock star in the field. Yeah. I I agree a 100%. And I and she's saying that, and I'm saying that because, you know, I've seen I actually have a video on on epigenetic clocks. I'm not sure if it was her group that published a study, but 11 different epigenetic clocks were compared, for, if I remember correctly, their prediction was chronological age. And, yeah, some of them were outright terrible. So, yeah, and that goes back to the idea of noise rather than they're actually looking at, you know, real things, real correlations with, aging. And even even even every epigenetic clock is not looking at the same aspects of aging. So that's also in that video. And if you're interested, just check it out, which epigenetic clock, just type in epigenetic clock on my channel, and you'll see that video. Each of the epigenetic clocks isn't measuring the same aspects of aging, whether it's, you know, problems related to mitochondria or inflammation or insulin sensitivity. They're not all the same. They some of them have different strengths and different weaknesses depending on what the aging related system is. So, that for now, that's why I'm focused on the blood based approach. As I mentioned, you know, how glucose should be is been studied for fifty to a hundred years, or actually, that's been studied for a hundred years. Other other aspects of the blood test, you know, the CBC, maybe fifty years. But there's an extensive literature on these things, whereas the epigenetic clocks are more new. And, again, as Morgan said, sorting through some of the noise for many of them. Let's see. Yeah. Don, the TruAge test gives you raw CPG sites. But I looked at their paper, and they said they derived the TruAge test from only three CPGs. Whereas, I know that the PhenoAge, Levine's PhenoAge, the the epigenetic clock for that, and Horvath are hundreds to thousands. And, so you want you want more. Right? Because the to assume that three methylation sites. And first of all, all epigenetic changes aren't just methylation. It's also acetylation. Right? Or deacetylation. Do you have acetyl groups, or do you not have acetyl groups? So that's only part of the story. But, that being said, there aren't really any acetylation clocks yet, and I hope to see actually combine methylation and acetylation clocks. That would be fantastic because now we're getting in a more complete picture. But that's what I mean in terms of the true age, three CpG sites. You know, is are three methylation sites gonna be representative of what's going on in terms of, quote, unquote, epigenetic aging when compared with thousands or hundreds of thousands of CBG sites? I mean, maybe maybe you can distill thousands of CBG sites like in Horvath clocks to three. I I don't know that that's true. Someone would have to show me that data and convince me, but I just don't buy it. You know? In that case, I think more data is better, more methylation or not methylated sites. It's better to look at more than less in that situation. So but, again, maybe I'm wrong and someone from TrueAge will reach out to me and not like what I have to say and and correct me. And, maybe I'm wrong. But from my understanding of literature, that's how I see it. Yeah. They're focused on researchers versus consumers like the, you know, AKG clock. Yeah. But, I'm pretty sure they sell sell AKG. And, I don't know. I did I hate to sound like a conspiracy theorist, but I I just our major red flag, eight year and and in that AKG supplement, it was basically AKG and just a few vitamins. I mean, to get an eight year reduction in, quote, unquote, epigenetic age, it's very hard to believe that. Yeah. It's just very hard to believe that. I I wish it's true. I really do, but it's just hard for me to believe that. Cool. Matthew, that's awesome. As long as you do it, I'll be watching and taking notes. Cool. Cool. I I'm willing to learn from everybody, so me too. Morgan Levine mentioned parabiosis is one thing her lab is focused on. Yeah. I like I said, she's she's fantastic. I'm excited to see, where her lab goes, everywhere her lab goes in terms of, science for as long as she does it, whether it's parabiosis or whatever she chooses to do. That I think all the stuff she puts out is fantastic. So David Sutherland, fun stream. Gotta run. Almost almost looks like we're almost done here unless anybody's got more questions. You're almost it's two hours later, I'm almost tapped out. Right? So, fun stream. Gotta run. Thanks for sharing. Alright. See you, David. Don, to clarify, the AKG test was not used in the Ponce de Leon product study Was not true age. Okay. Yeah. I I mean, I stand corrected. So, alright. I guess that's, all for now. I'll upload the video for anyone who missed it. Thanks everybody for, coming and and asking so many questions. This is fantastic. I don't know when we'll do it again, but, see you next time, and have a great day. Cheers.